J.

Jacet ecce Tibullus, Vix manet e toto parva quod urna capit. Ovid. — "See, here Tibullus lies; of one so great there hardly remains enough to fill a little urn." 

Jacta est alea. — "The die is cast." The deed is done, and there is now no room for deliberation. 

Jactitatio. Law Term. — "A boasting." Jactitation of marriage is a false boasting of a person that he, or she, is married to another, such not being the case. On a libel brought against the party guilty of jactitation, the ecclesiastical courts will impose silence on him or her. 

Jam desuetudine longa Vix subeunt ipsi verba Latina mihi. Ovid. — "From long disuse scarcely do Latin modes of expression recur to me." The complaint of Ovid, when in exile at Tomi in Pontus. 

Jam istaec insipientia est, Sic viam in promptu gerere. — Plaut. — "Why, this is sheer folly, thus to keep your wrath always bottled up in readiness." 

Jam nunc minaci murmure cornuum Perstringis aures; jam litui strepunt. Hor. — "Even now you stun our ears with the threatening murmur of horns; now the clarions sound." 

Jam pauca aratro jugera regiae Moles relinquent. -Hor. — "Princely palaces will soon leave but few acres to the plough." The allusion is to the vast tracts of land enclosed by the rich for purposes of ornament, and no longer available for the public benefit. 

Jam portum inveni, Spes et Fortuna valete! Nil mihi vobiscum est, ludite nunc alios. — "I have now gained the harbour, Hope and Fortune, adieu! I have nothing to do with you, now go play with others." A translation by Sir Thomas More of an Epigram in the Greek Anthology. See Inveni portum, &c. 

Jam proterva Fronte petit Lalage maritum. Hor. — "Already, with unblushing face, does Lalage seek a husband." 

Jam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna. Virg. — "Now the Virgin returns, now the Saturnian age returns." The supposed reign of Astraea, the goddess of justice, in tne Golden Age. 

Jam saevus apertam In rabiem coepit verti jocus, et per honestas Ire minax impune domos. Hor. — "At length the bitter raillery began to be turned into open rage, and menaces with impunity to stalk through reputable houses." 

Jam satis — ohe. Auson. — "Hold — enough!" 

Jam summa procul villarum culmina fumant. Virg.— "Now the high tops of the villages afar send forth their smoke." 

Jamque opus exegi, quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignis, Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas. Ovid. — "I have now completed a work which neither the anger of Jove, nor fire, nor the sword, nor consuming time, will he able to destroy." A prediction of the poet, which, thus far, has been verified, and deservedly so. 

Jamque quiescebant voces hominumque canumque; Lunaque nocturnos alta regebat equos. Ovid. — "And now the voices of men and the baying of dogs were lulled, and the moon or high was guiding the steeds of night." 

Janua lethi Sed patet immani, et vasto respectat hiatu. Lucret. — "But the gate of death yawns with its wide and vast entrance." "Broad is the way that leadeth to destruction." Matt. vii. 13. 

Januis clausis. — "With closed doors;" that is, "in secrecy." 

Jasper fert myrrham, thus Melchior, Balthazar aurum. Haec quicum secum portet tria nomina regum, Solvitur a morbo, Domini pietate, caduco. — "Jasper brings myrrh, Melchior frankincense, and Balthazar gold. Whoever carries with him the names of these three kings will be exempt, by the goodness of God, from the falling sickness." A mediaeval charm. These were said to be the names of the kings of the Magi, who were led by the star to the cradle of our Saviour in Bethlehem. They are usually called the Three Kings of Cologne. 

Jejunus raro stomachus vulgaria temnit. Hor. — "A hungry stomach rarely despises plain food," 

Jovis omnia plena. Virg. — "All things are full of Jove." The hand of Providence is visible everywhere. 

Jubeo totas aperire fenestras. Ovid. — "I bid you open all the windows." 

Jubilate Deo. — "O be joyful in the Lord." The beginning of the Hundreth Psalm. 

Jucunda et idonea dicere vitae. Hor. — "To relate what is agreeable and suited to our conduct in life." The useful as well as the amusing. See Omne tulit, &c. 

Jucunda est memoria praeteritorum malorum. Cic. — "The recollection of past evils is pleasant." 

Jucunda rerun vicissitudo. — "A delightful change of circumstances." 

Jucundi acti labores. Cic. — "The remembrance of difficulties overcome is delightful." 

Jucundum et carum sterilis facit uxor amicum. Juv. — "A barren wife makes a dear and interesting friend." To those, namely, who are looking for her husband's money after his decease. 

Jucundum nihil est, nisi quod reficit varietas. Syr. — "Nothing is pleasant that is not enlivened with variety." 

Judex damnatur cum nocens absolvitur. Syr. — "The judge is condemned when the guilty is acquitted." That is, when the sentence is supposed to be dictated by corrupt motives, or to betray incapacity. 

Judex non potest esse testis in propria causa. Coke. — "A judge cannot be a witness in his own cause." 

Judex non solum quid possit, sed etiam quid deceat ponderare debet. Cic. — "A judge ought to weigh well not only what he may do, but also what he ought to do." 

Judicandum est legibus, non exemplis. Law Max. — "We must judge according to law, not by precedent." 

Judice te mercede caret, per seque petenda est Externis virtus incomitata bonis. Ovid. — "In thy judgment, virtue needs no reward, and is to be sought for her own sake, unaccompanied by external benefits." 

Judices qui ex lege judicatis, legibus obtemperare debetis. Cic. — "You judges who judge according to the law, ought to be obedient to the law." 

Judicia Dei sunt ita recondita ut quis illa scrutari nullatenus possit. Cic. — "The decrees of God are so impenetrable, that no one can possibly scrutinize them." The ways of Heaven are unsearchable. See Job v. 9; Rom. ii. 33. 

Judicio acri perpendere. Lucret. — "To weigh with keen discernment." 

Judicis est innocentiae subvenire. Cic. — "It is the duty of the judge to succour innocence." 

Judicis officium est, ut res, ita tempora rerum Quaerere. - Ovid. — "It is the duty of a judge, to consider not only the facts, but the circumstances of the case." 

Judicium Dei. — "The judgment of God." The name by which the ordeal by fire or water was called in the middle ages, because it was supposed that God would by his intervention manifest the guilt or innocence of the party tried. 

Judicium parium aut leges terrae. — "The judgment of our peers, or the laws of the land." By these only can an Englishman be condemned. Words from the Magna Charta, selected as his motto by that eminent judge, Lord Camden. The nobles are judged by the nobles, the commons by the commons, each by their peers. 

Judicium subtile videndis artibus. Hor. — "An acute discernment in understanding the arts." 

Jugulare mortuos. Prov. — "To stab the dead." To be guilty not only of needless cruelty, but also of cowardice. 

Juncta juvant. — "United, they assist." Said of things trifling in themselves, but which, put together, acquire strength. 

Jungere dextras. Virg. — "To join right hands." Or, as we say, "to shake hands." 

Jungere equos Titan velocibus imperat Horis. Ovid. — "Titan commands the swift-flying Hours to yoke the horses." The poet speaks of the Hours, which were personified under the names of Eunomia, Dice, Irene, Carpo, and Thallo, as harnessing the horses of the sun. 

Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris. Lucan. — "Where'er you turn your eyes, where'er you move, 'tis God you see." The doctrine of Pantheism. 

Jupiter in multos temeraria fulmina torquet, Qui poenam culpa non meruere pati. Ovid. — "Jupiter hurls his lightnings at random against many who have not deserved punishment for any commensurate fault." 

Jupiter tonans. — "The thunderer Jove." "The Jupiter tonans of debate," i.e. a "great gun" in argument. 

Jura negat sibi nata, nihil non arrogat armis. Hor. — "He denies that laws were framed against him; he arrogates everything to himself by force of arms." The acts of a tyrant or usurper. 

Juratores sunt judices facti. Law Max. — "The jurors are the judges of the facts." 

Juravi lingua, mentem injuratam gero. Cic. — "I have sworn with my tongue, but I have a mind unsworn." I feel no constraint to perform my oath. The words of a man from whom an oath has been extorted by unlawful means and under duress, or the mental reservation of a subtle casuist. 

Jure divino. — "By Divine law," meaning, "by the will of Heaven," irrespective of the will of the people. The sovereigns of the line of the Stuarts were the last monarchs of Great Britain who claimed to govern by this title. 

Jure humano. — "By human law." By laws made and upheld by men. The present emperor of France professes to reign jure humano, "by the will of the people." 

Jure repraesentationis. Law Term. — "By right of representation." As representing another party. 

Jurgia praecipue vino stimulata caveto. Ovid. — "Especially avoid quarrels excited by wine." 

Jus aliquod faciunt affinia vincula nobis. Ovid. — "The links of connexion form a certain tie between us." 

Jus civile. — "The civil law," i.e. the Roman law, which, to a certain extent, is still used in our ecclesiastical courts. 

Jus civile neque inflecti gratia", neque perfringi potentia, neque adulterari pecunia debet. Cic. — "The law of the land ought neither to be warped by favour, nor broken through by power, nor corrupted by money." 

Jus divinum. — "Divine right." 

Jus gentium. — "The law of nations." Laws formed on strict principles of universal justice, and acknowledged by all nations of the civilized world as the basis of their international relations. 

Jus postlimini. — "The law of recovery." A Roman law which restored certain rights and privileges to one who had lost them was thus called. 

Jus primogenitures. — "The right of eldership." 

Jus proprietatis. — "The right of property." 

Jus regium. — "Royal right." 

Jus sanguinis quod in legitimis successionibus spectatur, ipso nativitatis tempore quaesitum est. Law Max. — "The right of consanguinity, which is regarded in successions by law, is established at the very moment of our birth." 

Jus summum saepe summa malitia est. Ter. — "Extreme law is often extreme wrong." See Summum jus, &c. 

Justae causae facilis est defensio. Cic. — "It is easy to defend a just cause." 

Justissimus unus Et servantissimus aequi. Virg. — "Most just and most observant of what is right." The character of Ripheus. 

Justitia erga Deum religio dicitur; erga parentes pietas. — Cic. — "Fulfilment of our duty towards God is called religion; towards our parents, piety." 

Justitia est obtemperatio scriptis legibus. Cic. — "Justice is obedience to the written law." 

Justitia nihil expetit praemii. Cic. — "Justice seeks no reward." 

Justitia non novit patrem nec matrem, solum veritatem spectat. Law Max. — "Justice knows neither father nor mother; it looks at truth alone." 

Justitia tanta vis est, ut ne illi quidem, qui maleficio et scelere pascuntur, possint sine ulla particula justitiae vivere. Cic. — "There is so vast a power in justice, that those even who live by crime and wickedness, cannot live without some small portion of justice among them." Hence the proverb which says that "There is honour among thieves." 

Justitiae partes sunt, non violare homines, verecundiae non offendere. Cic. — "It is the duty of justice to do injury to no man; of propriety, to offend none." 

Justum bellum quibus necessarium, et pia arma quibus nulla nisi in armis relinquitur spes. Livy. — "War is just to those to whom it is necessary; and an appeal to arms is a sacred duty with those who have no hope left except in arms." 

Justum et tenacem propositi virum, Non civium ardor prava jubentium, Non vultus instantis tyranni Mente quatit solida. Hor. — "Not the rage of the people pressing to hurtful measures, not the aspect of the threatening tyrant, can shake from his settled purpose the man who is just and determined in his resolution. '" 

Juvenile vitium regere non posse impetum. Sen. — "It is the failing of youth, not to be able to restrain its own impetuosity." 

Juxta fluvium puteum fodit. Prov. — "He is digging a well close by a river." Said of a person adding to a supply which is already more than sufficient. 

K. 

Kyrie eleeison. — "Lord, have mercy upon us." Two Latinized Greek words in common use in the responses of the Romish Church. 

L. 

LL. D. for "Legum Doctor" "Doctor of Laws." 

L. S. for "Locus sigilli", which see. 

Labitur et labetur in omne volubilis aevum. Hor. — See Rusticus expectat, &c. 

Labitur occulte, fallitque volubilis aetas. Ovid. — "Age glides stealthily on, and beguiles us as it flies." 

Labor omnia vincit Improbus. Virg. — "Incessant labour conquers everything." 

Laborum Dulce levamen. Hor. — "The sweet soother of my cares." The words addressed by the poet to his lyre, the solace of his leisure hours. 

Lachrymaeque decorae, Gratior et pulchro veniens in corpore virtus. Virg. — "His graceful tears, and a merit that still more commends itself in a beauteous person." 

Lactuca innatat acri Post vinum stomacho. - Hor. — "Lettuce after wine floats on an acrid stomach." Words to be borne in mind by the bon vivant. 

Laetus in praesens animus, quod ultra est Oderit curare, et amara lento Temperet risu. Nihil est ab omni Parte beatum. Hor. — "The mind that is cheerful at the present hour, will be indifferent ahout anything beyond it, and meet the bitters of life with a complacent smile. Nothing is blessed on every side." 

Laetus sorte tua vives sapienter. — "If you are wise you will live contented with your lot." 

Lapides loquitur, caveant lectores ne cerebrum iis excutiat. — "He speaks stones; let his readers take care that he does not knock their brains out." See Plautus, Aulul. II. i. 29. 

Lapis philosophorum. — "The philosopher's stone." A supposed mineral, sought by the alchemists of the middle ages, the property of which was to transmute the base metals into gold. 

Lapis qui volvitur algam non generat. Prov. — "A rolling stone finds no sea-weed." Or as we say, "A rolling stone gathers no moss." The figure, in the Latin, refers to the stone on the sea-shore, upon which, as it rolls to and fro, the sea-weed does not collect. 

Lapsus calami. — "A slip of the pen." 

Lapsus linguae. — "A slip of the tongue." 

Lascivi soboles gregis. Hor. — "The descendants of a wanton race." 

Lateat scintillula forsan. — "Some small spark may lie perchance concealed." These words (in reference to the vital spark) have been adopted as the motto of the Humane Society for the recovery of persons apparently drowned. 

Laterem lavas. Prov. — "You are washing a brick." This was originally said of unburnt bricks, which the more they were scoured, the more muddy they became. " You are making bad worse." 

Latet anguis in herba. Virg. — "A snake lies hidden in the grass." Individuals, like armies, suffer most from perils that lie in ambush. 

Latius regnes, avidum domando Spiritum, quam si Libyam remotis Gadibus jungas, et uterque Poenus Serviat uni. Hor. — You may possess a more extensive dominion by controlling a craving disposition, than if you could unite Libya to the distant Gades, and the natives of either Carthage were subject to you alone." 

Latrant me, lateo ac taceo. — "They bark at me, but I lie hid, and hold my tongue." 

Latrante uno, latrat statim et alter canis. Prov. — "When one dog barks, another at once barks too." 

Latrantem curatne alta Diana canem? Prov. — "Does Diana on high care for the dog that bays her?" 

Laudari a laudato viro. Cic. — "To be praised by a man who deserves praise." 

Laudat venales qui vult extrudere merces. Hor. — "He praises the wares he has to sell who wishes to push them off upon others." 

Laudato ingentia rura, Exiguum colito. Virg. — "Commend large estates, but cultivate a small one." You will both avoid giving offence to others, and will insure your own happiness and peace of mind. 

Laudator temporis acti. Hor. — "A praiser of times past." An old man, who, like Nestor in the Iliad, is always praising the men and manners of former times. A weakness both amiable and natural. See Aetas parentum, &c. 

Laudatur ab his, culpatur ab illis. Hor. — "He is praised by these, censured by those." 

Laudibus arguitur vini vinosus. Hor. — "The drunkard is convicted by his praises of wine." 

Laudis amore tumes? sunt certa piacula quae te Ter pure lecto, poterunt recreare, libello. Hor. — "Do you swell with the love of praise? There are [in philosophy] certain purgations which can restore you, a certain treatise being thrice perused with purity of mind." 

Laudo Deum verum, plebem voco, congrego clerum, Defunctos ploro, pestem fugo, festa decoro. — "I praise the true God, I summon the people, I assemble the clergy, I mourn the dead, I put to flight the plague, I celebrate festivals." Inscription on a church bell. See Funera, &c. 

Laudo, malum cum amici tuum ducis malum. Plaut. — "I commend you for considering the affliction of your friend your own affliction." 

Laureum baculum gesto. Prov. — "I carry a sprig of laurel." I am proof against all dangers. The laurel was thought by the ancients to be an antidote against poison, and to afford security against lightning. 

Laus Deo. — "Praise be to God." 

Laus in proprio ore sordescit. Prov. — "A man's own praise of himself is unseemly." "Self-praise is no recommendation." 

Leberide caecior. Prov. — "Blinder than a serpent's slough." Which has holes only instead of eyes. 

Lege totum si vis scire totum. — "Read the whole if you wish to know the whole." It is not easy to judge of a book on one connected subject, by reading a bit here and there. 

Legem brevem esse oportet quo fAcilius ab imperItis teneatur. Sen. — "A law ought to be short that it may be the more easily understood by the unlearned." 

Leges a victoribus dicuntur, accipiuntur a victis. Curt. — "Conditions are made by the conquerors, accepted by the conquered." 

Leges ad civium salutem, civitatumque incolumitatem conditae sunt. Cic. — "Laws were made for the safety of citizens, and the security of states." 

Leges mori serviunt. Plaut. — "The laws are subservient to usage." 

Leges sunt invented quae cum omnibus semper una atque eadem voce loquerentur. Cic. — "Laws are so made that they may always speak with one and the same voice to all." Good laws are no respecters of persons. 

Legis constructio non facit injuriam. Law Max. — "The construction of the law does injury to no man." Por instance, it will not suppose a man to grant away that which right fully belongs to another.


::::::::::::::::
PAG. 201
::::::::::::::::


~—LegWtmafrauddtur liter a voce ; Blcesaque fit jusso lingua coacta sono. Ovid. — " The letters are deprived of their full sound, and the lisping tongue is contracted with an affected pronunciation." 

Legum ministri maqistrdtus, legum interprftes judlces ; lequm di-nlque idcirco omnes servi sumus, ut Viberi esse posslmu*. Cic. — " The magistrates are the ministers of the law, the judges tl.e interpreters of the laws ; we all, in fine, are the servants of the law, that we may be free." 

L'-nior et itu'Uor Jis, accedente senectd? Hor. — "Do you become milder and better, as old age approaches ?" 

Lentter ex mPrlto quidquid patidre ferendum est, Qua venit indigne poena dolenda venit. Ovid. — "Whatever you suffer deservedly should be borne with 
patience; the penalty that comes upon us undeservedly comes as a ground for complaint." The poet thus consoles himself, upon his banisnment to Thrace without hav- 
ing deserved it. 

Lcntiscum mandtre. Prov. — " To chew mastich." Said of people over-nice about their personal appearance. Gum mastich is a whitener of the teeth, and a preserver of the 
gums. 

Lednem larvd terres. Prov. — "You are for frightening a lion with a mask." 

Leonlna sociPtas. Prov. — " A lion's society." A partnership where one individual engrosses the whole power and authority. See the Fable of the Lion in Partnership, in Phcedrus, b. i. f. 1. 

Leonlni versus. — " Leonine verses." These consist of Latin hexameters, or hexameters and pentameters, in rhyme. There are various kinds ; but the most common is that in 
which the caesura in the fifth syllable rhymes with the end of the line, thus : 

En rex Edvardus debacchans ut leopardus. (" Lo! king Edward, raging like a leopard.") Other metres are however used in the Leonine hymns cf 
the Roman Catholic Church. The name is said to have been derived from Leoninus, a monk of the twelfth century. He may very possibly have revived the use of these 
rhymes ; but we find them composed as far back as the third century. 

Jjeonum ora a magistris impiine tractantur. Sex. — " The mouths of lions are handled with impunity by their keepers." That which is dangerous to oue man may be 
done in safety by another. 

JJep"'di mores turpem ornatum facile factis comprobant. Plaut. — " Good morals have no difficulty in setting off a loMc'ly garb." 

Leporis vitam vivit. Prov. — " He lives the lite of a tare." He is always full of fears and anxiety. 

Lepos et festivitas oratibnis. Cic. — " The pleasantry and playfulness of his conversation." 

Leve Jit quod bene fertur onus. Ovid. — " The load becomes light which is borne with cheerfulness." 

Leves homines futiiri sunt improvidi. Tacit. — " Light-minded men are careless of the future." 

Levia perpessi sunius, si fienda patimur. Sen. — " We have had to suffer but trifles if our sufferings are merely such as we should weep for." Beal misfortunes require something more than tears as their remedy. 

Levibra sunt ir.juria, quae repentino aTiquo tnotu accidunt, quam ea quae meditate prcepardta inferuntur. Cic. — " The injuries which befall us unexpectedly are less severe than those which we are deliberately anticipating." 

Levis est dolor qui cappre consilium potest. Sen. — " That grief is but light which can take counsel." 

Levius solet timere qui propius timet. Sen. — "A man's fears are diminished when the danger is near at hand." Dangers appears less formidable when looked in the face. 

Lex appetit perfectum. Law Max. — " The law aims at perfection." 

Lex cttius tolerdre vult privatum damnum quam publicum malum. Coke. — " The law will sooner tolerate a private loss than a public evil." 

Lex est, quce in Grcecbrum convlviis obtinetur, aut bibat aut abeat. Et recti. Aut enim frudtur aliquis, pdriter cum aliis, voluptdte potandi ; ut ne sobrius in violentiam vinolentorum incldat ante discedat. Cic. — " At the banquets of the Greeks a custom prevails, that every man shall either drink or begone : and with good reason : for every man should enjoy, equally with the rest, the pleasure of drinking ; lest he, being sober, shoidd witness any violence of conduct, before he departs, on the part of those who are overtaken with wine." 

Lex neminem cogit ad impossibllia. Law Max. — " The law compels no man to do impossibilities." If a man under a penalty in a bond undertakes to do a physical impossibility, the law will not allow the penalty to be recovered. 

Lex nemlni operator iniquum ; nemini facit injuriam. Law Max. — "The law works injustice to no man, does injury to none." 

Lex non scripta. — " The unwritten law." The common law of England, which originated in custom prior to the time of Richard I., and has never been committed to writing. 
The eldest son inherits realty to the exclusion of the younger children under the Lex non scripta. 

Lex prosptcit non respicit. Law Max. — " The law is prospective, not retrospective." 

Lex scripta. — " The written " or " statute law." 

Lex talidnis. — " The law of retaliation," or " of requital." " An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth." This is the law of revenge, not of justice, and not unlike what the 
Americans call " Lynch Law." 

Lex terra. — " The law of the land." A term used in contradistinction to the " civil law." 

Lex universa est qua jubet nasci et mori. Syr. — " There is one universal law which commands that we shall be born and shall die." 

LibPra te metu mortis. Sen. — " Deliver thyself from the fear of death." By doing your best to insure the reward of a good life. 

L'ibfri parentes alant, aut vinciantur. — " Let children support their parents, or be imprisoned." A lloman law. 

LtbPrius quoin ut imperantium mPnonissent. Tacit. — " Too freely to remember their own rulers." 

Libertas est potestas faciendi id quod jure licet. Law Max. — " Liberty is the power of doing that which the law permits." The proper estimate of real liberty. 

Libertas, qua sera, tamen respexit inertem. VlRG. — " Liberty which, though late, looked back upon me in my helpless state." 

Libertas ultima mundi Quo steterit ferienda loco. LuCAB'. — "In the spot where liberty has made her last stand must she be smitten." A sentiment attributed by Lucan to 
Julius Caesar. 

Libidinosa et intemperans adolescentia effoetwm corpus tradit senectuti. Cic. — " A youth of sensuality and intemperance transmits to old age a worn-out body." 

Libido effirendta efrendtam appetentiam effiicit. Prov. — " Unbridled gratification produces unbridled desire." See Sic quibus y &c. 

Libra justa justitiam servat. — "A just balance preserves justice." 

Liceat concedere veris. Hob. — "It is only right to yield to truth.." 

Licet superbus ambules pecunid, Fortuna non mutat genus. Hor. — " Although you may strut about, proud of your money, fortune does not change birth." Words addressed to a 
conceited parvenu. 

Licuit, semperque licebit ' Farcere personis, dicere de vitiis. — " It ever has been lawful, and ever will be, to spare the person, but to censure the vice." 

Lignum vitce. — " The wood of life." Boxwood, or the wood of the guaiacum officinale, is popularly so called. 

Lima labor et mora. Hoe. — " The labour and tediousness of the file." The wearisome labour of correcting and giving the last polish to a work. 

Lingua mali loquax males mentis est indicium. Stb. — "An evil tongue is the proof of an evil mind." Because " Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." Luke vi. 4, 5. 

Lingua mali pars pessima servi. Juv. — " The tongue is the worst part of a bad servant." If a servant is unprincipled, the opportunities which he has for slander render 
his power for evil ten-fold greater. 

Lingua melior, sedfrlgida bello Dextera. VlRG. — " Excelling in speech, but of a right hand slow to war." The description given of Drances. 

Lingua, sile ; non est ultra narrdbile quicquam. Ovtd.— " My tongue, be silent ; not another word must be said." Linguas centum sunt, oraque centum, Ferrea vox. Virg. — " It has a hundred tongues, a hundred mouths, a votoe of iron." The attributes of rumour. 

Linguae prorsus non nego Habere atque agere maxlmas me gratias • Yerum oculis utpriveris opto pcrfidis. Phjed. — " I do not deny that to your tongue I owe most sincere 
thanks, and I return them ; but I wish you may be deprive! of your perfidious eyes." Said to one who, though be may hold his tongue, still acts the traitor by his significant looks. 

Linguam alicujus futllem ac ventosam retundPre. Livy. — " To silence the Dabbling empty tongue of a person." 

Linguam compescere, virtu* non minima est. — " To restrain the tongue is not the least of virtues." 

Linquenda tellus, et dornus, et placens Uxor, neque harum, quas colis, arburum, Te, preeter invlsas cupressos, TTlla brevem d&mlnum sequttur. Hor. — "Your estate, your house, and your pleasing wife must be left, nor shall any of these trees which you are tending follow you, their owner for a brief space, eicept the hated cypresses." The cypress was planted near tne graves of the dead. 

Lis litem gPnPrat. Prov. — " Strife begets strife." 

Litem paret lis, noxa item noxam parit. Prov. — " Dispute begets dispute, and injury begets injury." 

LltPra ean'ina. — "The canine letter." The letter E is so called, as it seems to be pronounced by a dog when he snarls, " Grr, Grrr," as Kabelais says. 

Lit?ra scripta manet. — "The written letter remains." Words may escape our memory, but that which is written remains established as proof of the intention of the writer. 
Probably a portion 01 a mediaeval pentameter. 

LitSra? Bell?rophontis. Prov. — " Letters of Bellerophon." Proetus, king of Argos, suspecting that Bellerophon had attempted to corrupt the chastity of his wife, sent him 
to the king of Syria with a sealed letter directing him to put the bearer to death. Hence letters which are dangerous to the bearer are called Literes Bellerophontis. 

LltercB humaniores. — "Polite literature," or "arts," in University parlance. 

I/ittus ama, altum alii teneant. Virg. — " Hug the shore, let others stand out into the deep." Figuratively applied, these words warn us not to launch out into hazardous enterprises, but to consult the dictates of prudence. 

Ziividi limis oculis semper aspiciunt alv'trum commoda. Cic— M Envious men always view with jealousy the prosperity of others." Loc. cit. for Loco citato. — " In the place quoted." 

Locum tenens. — " Holding his place," meaning, a person acting for, or holding the office of, another. A substitute or deputy, or, more strictly speaking, a lieutenant. 

Locus est et pluvious umbris. Hoe. — " There is room enough for more to introduce their friends." The "umbra," or "shadow," was a guest's friend, allowed by the 
Roman custom to accompany him at banquets and entertainments. 

Locus in quo. — " The place in which." Meaning, the place or position which was previously occupied. 

Locus sigilli. — "The place for the seal" — which is pointed out in copies of deeds or sealed documents by the letters L. S. 

Locus standi. — " A place for standing." A position assumed in argument. 

Longa est injuria, longce Ambages. VlRG. — " Lengthened is the story of my wrongs, tedious the detail." 

Longa mora est, quantum noxce sit ublque repertum Enumerdre : minor fu.it ipsa infamia vero. Ovid. — " It were an endless task to enumerate how great an amount of guilt everywhere prevailed ; even the report itself was below the truth." The words of Jupiter when he found it necessary to destroy mankind by the deluge. 

Longa via est, nee tempora longa supersunt, Dixit; et Tiospltibus jdnua nostra patet. Ovid. — " ' Long is the road,' said he, ' and little of the day re- 
mains ; my door too is ever open to the stranger.' " 

Longe aberrat scopo. — " He is wide of the mark." " He has wandered far from his sphere." 

Longe absit. — " Tar be it from me." Or as we say, " God forbid." 

Longe vnea discrPpat istis Et vox et ratio. Hon. — " Both my language and my sentiments differ widely from theirs." 

Longum iter est per prcecepta, breve et efficax per cxempla. Seh. — " The road by precept is long ; by example, short and effectual." 

Loquendum ut vulgus, sentiendum ut docti. Coke. — "We should speak with the populace, think with the learned." 

Lotis manlbus. — " With clean hands." 

Lubrlca nascentes implent conchylia luiue. Hor. — "The increasing moon plumps up the slippery oyster." A dictum to be remembered by the epicure. 

Lvbrlca statio et proximo pracipitio. — " A slippery spot, and on the edge of a precipice." 

Lubrici stint fort una gressus. — " The footsteps of fortune are slippery." 

Lubncum lingua non facile in pcenam est trahendum. Law Max. — " A slip of the tongue ought not to be puuiahed without, due consideration." 

Lucem redde ttus, dux bone, patria ; Instar veris enim vultus ubi turn Affulsit popiilo, grdtior et dies, Et soles melius nitent Hob. — " Bestore, excellent prince, light to thy country ; for, like the spring, wherever thy countenance has shone, the day passes more agreeably for the people, and the sun has a superior lustre." An eulogium, addressed by the poet to the emperor Augustus, during his absence from Rome. 

Lucet, eamus Quo ducit gula. Hoe. — " It is day, let us go whither appetite leads us." 

Lucldus ordo. Hor. — " Perspicuous arrangement." Method. « 

Lucri bonus est odor ex re QudTibet. Juv. — " The smell of gain is good, come from what it may." Vespasian made this reply to his son Titus, when he expostulated with him upon his imposing a tax upon urine. 

— — Lucrum amdre nullum amatdrem decet. Plaut. — " No lover ought to be in love with pelf." 

Lucrum malum cequdle dispendio. Prov. — " An evil gain is equal to a loss." "What is ill-gotten rarely thrivee." 

Z/uctantem Lcdriis fluctlbus Afrlcum Mercdtor metuens, otium et oppldi JMudat rura sui : mox reficit rates Quassas, indocllis pauperiem pati. Qoft. — " The merchant, dreading the south-west wind contending with the Icarian waves, commends the tranquillity and the rural retirement of the country-town ; hut soon, incapahle of .being taught to endure poverty, he refits his shattered bark." 

Lriictantes ventos tempestdtesque sonoras Imperio premit. VlEG. — " He represses by his control the struggling winds, and the resounding tempests." Said in allusion to the sway of ^Ettlus, the god of the winds. 

Lucus a non lucendo. — That is, Lucus, " a grove," is derived, by antiphrasis, from non lucere, " not to admit light," because, as the grammarians said, it does not allow the light of the sun to shine through it. This derivation is found in Servius on JEneid I., Charisius, and Diomedes. Quintilian (i. 6) also notices it, but merely to ask whether such derivations from contraries can possibly be received by reasonable people ; some critics having also imagined that ludus, "a school," was so called a non ludendo, because no play was allowed in it, and that Pluto was called Ditis, " rich," because he was minime dives, "not at all rich." Vossius condemns the derivation of lucus from luceo as a mere fancy of the grammarians, and alludes to another given by Isidore, xiv. 8, a collucendo crebris luminibus reliaionis causa, " from the number of lamps or torches that were often lighted in the sacred groves," lucus being properly a grove consecrated to some deity, though often used in a general sense. But Vossius prefers on the whole to derive it from Xox°£, " an ambush." Others would have it for lugus from Xuyjj, " darkness." The real etymology is quite uncertain. Servius, who favours the derivation from luceo, adduces, in support of it, another imagination of the grammarians, helium, " war," a nulla re belld, because it has nothing pleasing in it ; and Varro, de L. L., book v., rather inclines to think that ccelum, " heaven," may be derived a celando, from "to conceal," quia apertum est, "because it is open." Lucus a, non lucendo has become proverbial in ridicule of absurd or far-fetched etymologies. See Non sequitur, and Obscurum per obscurius. 

Ludere cum sacris. — "To play with holy things." To jest on sacred subjects. 

Ludit in humanis Dlvlna potentia rebus ; Et certam prcesens vLv habet horafident. Ovid. — " The Divine power finds sport in the affairs of men, and the present moment hardly carries positive assurance' 

Ludus iin"mo debet al/yitam/o duri, Ad cogitandum mPlior ut rtdeat tibi. Pn 1 n. — " Recreation ought sometimes to he given to the mind, that it may return to you better fitted tor thought." 

Lug<te VPnPret Cupldinesque. Catull. — " Mourn, ye Venuses and Cupids." These words, used by the poet in commemorating the death of Lesbia's favourite sparrow, 
are sometimes employed ironically. 

Lumen soli mutuitm das. Prov. — " You are lending light to the sun." Said of persons who affect to explain what is perfectly clear and intelligible, or, as Young says of 
commentators, " Hold their farthing candle to the sun." 

Lupus infiibfili. Prov. — "The wolf in the fable." Alluding to the accidental arrival of the person who happens at that moment to be the subject of conversation. Like the wolf of ancient fable, which was said to have that power, his appearance deprives the speakers of their voice, or, in other words, puts a stop to their conversation. See Edere non poteris, &c. 

Lupus pihtm mutat, non mentem. Prov. — "The wolf changes his hair, but not his nature." See Naturam expellas, &c. 

Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibi.sd. Tempus abire tibi est. Hon. — " Thou hast trifled enough, hast eaten and drunk enough, 'tis time for thee to depart." Words addressed to an aged sensualist, on the verge of the grave. 

Lusit amdblliter, donee jam sawus apertam In rabiem verti coepit jocus. Hob. — " This raillery sported on pleasantly enough, till at length, becoming bitter, it began to turn into virulence." 

Lusus nah'irce. — " A freak of nature." A deformed or unnatural production is so called. 

Lutum nisi tunddtur, non fit urceus. Prov. — " Unless the clay be well pounded, no pitcher can be made." Nothing of value can be produced without industry. 

Luxum populi expidre solent bella. — " The luxury of a people is usually expiated by war." Luxury and dissipation produce disorder, the fruitful parent of turbulence and war. 

Luxuries desunt multa, avaritiae omnia. Syr. — " Luxury is in want of many things ; avarice, of everything."

Luxuriant ariimi rebus plerumque secundis ; Nee facile est cequd commoda mente pati. Ovid. — " The feelings often run riot amid prosperity ; and to bear good fortune with evenness of mind is no easy task." 


M. 

M. D. "Medicinos Doctor." — " Doctor in Medicine." 

M. 8. See Manu scriptum. 

Made virtiite. Virg. — " Be strong in virtue." These words are sometimes used ironically. 

Made virtiite diligentidque esto. Livt. — " Be strong in virtue and diligence." 

Ma cults quas aut incur ia fudit, Aut humdna parum cavit natura. Hor. — "The blemishes which carelessness has produced, or against which human nature is not sufficiently on its guard." 

Mddidis Notus evolat alis. Ovid. — "The south-west wind flies forth with dripping wings."

Magdlia quondam. Virg. — " Once cottages." The same may be said, as to the ground on which they stand, of some of the most gorgeous palaces of the present day. 

Magis gaudet quam qui senedam exii.it. JProv. — " He is more delighted than one who has put off old age," i. e. has become young again. 

Magis ilia juvant qua pluris etnuntur. Juv. — " Those things please most which cost most." 

Magis magni clerici non sunt magis sdpientes. JProv. — " The 

greatest scholars are not the wisest men;" in a worldly point of view. A mediaeval proverb. 

Magis mutus quam piscis. Prov. — " More dumb than a fish." 

Magister alius casus. Plinv the Elder. — " Chance is a second master." 

Magister drtis ingenique largltor Venter. Pees. r ?. — " Hunger, the teacher of the arts, and the bestower of invention." 

Magistral us indlcat virum. — " Office proves the man." Motto of the Earl of Lonsdale. 

Magna Charta. — " The Great Charter." The Charter which was obtained from King John by the barons of England, in the year 1215, and which has ever since been regarded as the great bulwark of the liberties of Great Britain. 

Magna civitas, magna solitudo. Prov. — "A great city, a great desert." A Latin adage taken from a Greek coraic poet, who said of the city of Megalopolis in Arcadia, 'Epij/j/a ti£yaX»j '<ttiv i) MeyaX?/ iroXic- " The great city, (or Megaopolis,) is a great wilderness." 

Magna est admirdtio copibse sdpienterque d'tcentis. Cic. — " Great is our admiration of one who expresses himself with fluency and wisdom." 

Magna est Veritas et prcevali-bit. — "Truth is powerful, and she will prevail." An adaptation of the words in /. Esdras, iv. 41. 

Magna est vis consuetfidinis : ncec ferre laborem, contemntre vulnus et dolorem docet. Cic. — " Great is the power of habit : this teaches us to bear fatigue, and to despise wounds and pain." 

Magna Juit quondam capitis reverentia cani, lnque suo pretio ruga senilis erat. Ovid. — "In days of yore great was the respect paid to the hoary head, and honoured were the wrinkles of age." 

Magna medius comitante catervd. Vibg. — " In the midst of a vast crowd which attended him." 

Magna movet st5macho fastidia, si puer unetis Tractdvit cdlicem mdnibus. Hoe. — " The stomach is sensible of great loathing, if the servant touches your cup with his greasy hands." 

Magna quidem sacris qua dat prcecepta Hbellis rictrix Fortunes Sapientia. Ducimus autem Sos quoque Jelices, qui ferre incommoda vita, Nee jactdre jugum vita didicere magistrd. JlJV. — " ftoble indeed are the precepts which Philosophy, that triumphs over Fortune, lays down in her sacred pages. Yet we deem those happy too, who, with daily life for their preceptress, have learnt to endure with patience the evils of life, and not to struggle against the yoke." 

Magna servttus est magna fortuna. Sen. — "A great fortune is a great servitude;" — in consequence of the many and imperative duties which it entails. 

Magna vis est conscientim in utramque 'partem, ut neqw ttmeant qui nihil commiserunt, et pcenam ante oculos versdri putent qui peccdrunt." Cic. — " The power of conscience is great in both ways; those have nothing to fear who have committed no crime ; and those who have sinned always have punishment before their eyes." 

Magna vis est, magnum- nomen, unum et idem sentientis sendtus. Cic. — " Great is the power, great the name, of a senate which is unanimous in its opinions." 

Magna? felicitates multum callglnis mentlbus hnmdnis objwiunt. Sen. — " Great prosperity involves the human mind in extreme darkness." Men who are suddenly prosperous are apt to lose sight of their duties and obligations. 

Magna fortunes comes adest aduldtio. — " Adulation is the attendant on great wealth." 

Magnas inter opes inops. Hoe. — " Poor in the midst of great wealth." A description of a miser, who knows not the proper use of money, and dares not spend it. 

Magne pater divum, savos punlre tyrannos Haud alia ratione veils Virtutem vtdeant, intdbescantque videndo. Pers. — " Great father of the gods, be pleased to punish cruel tyrants in no other way than that they may behold virtue, and pine in despair as they behold her." The pangs of remorse are the severest punishment. 

Magni ariimi est injurias despicere. Sen. — " It is the duty of a great mind to despise injuries." 

Magni est inqenii revocdre mentem a senstbus, et cbgitatiunem a consuetudme abdilcere. Cic. — " It requires great intellect to release the mind from the thraldom of the senses, and to wean the thoughts from confirmed habits." 

■ i Magni nommis umbra. Lucan. — " The shadow of a great name." These words are sometimes applied to the degenerate son or descendant of an illustrious father or ancestor. The son of Cicero, for instance, was only tho shadow of his father's great name. See Stat magni, &c. 

Magni refert quibuscum vixtris. Prov. — " It is of gnat eon. ■equenoe with whom you live." People are generally estimated according to the character of their associates. 

Magnis tamen excldit aims. Ovid. — " He fell, however, in a great attempt." See Hie situs est, &c. 

Magno conatu magna* nugas. Ter. — " Great efforts on great trifles." 

Magno cum perlciilo custodltur, quod mitltis placet. Syr. — " That is kept with great danger, which is coveted by many." 

Magno deflurriine mallem Quam ex hoc fontlculo tantundem silmhre. Hor. — " I had rather draw my glass of water from a great river 
than the same quantity from this little spring." Said ironically in reproof of those who lay by large stores and never use them. 

Magnorum haud unquam indignus avorum. Viro. — " Never proving unworthy of his illustrious ancestors." 

Magnos hbrriines virtute methnur, non fortund. Corn. Nep. — " We estimate great men by their virtue, not by their success." Philosophers may do this, but the public does not. 

Magnum bonum. — " A great good." A species of plum is so called. 

Magnum est argumentum in utroque fuisse moderdtum. — " It is greatly in a man's favour, to have shown himself moderate, when placed in either situation." 

Magnum hoc ego duco, Quod pldcui tibi, qui turpi secernis honestum, Nonpatrepracldro, sed vita, et pectfrre puro. Hor. — " I esteem it a great blessing that I pleased you, who distinguish probity from baseness, not by the illustriousness of a father, but by the purity of the heart and feelings." 

• i Magnum hoc vltium vino est, Pedes captat primum ; luctdtor dolusus est. Plaut. — " This is the great fault in wine ; it first trips up tha feet : it is a cunning wrestler." 

Magnum paupPries opprobrium jubet Quidvis aut fdcere aut pati. Hor. " Poverty, a great reproach, impels us to do or to Bodes 
anything." 

Magnum vectlgal est parsimonia. Cic. — " Economy is a, great revenue." On the principle of Franklin's favourite saying — " A penny saved is a penny earned." 

Magnus Alexander corpore parvus erat. Prov. — " The great Alexander was small in stature." 

Major e longinquo reverentia. Tac. — " Eespect is greater afc a distance." Similar to our proverb, " Familiarity breeds contempt." The French have a saying, that " No man ia a hero to his valet." 

Major fames sitis est quam Virtutis ; quis enim virtutem amplecfitur ipsam, Prasmia si tollas ? Juv. 

— " The thirst for fame is greater than for virtue ; for, take away the reward, and who would embrace virtue?" Strictly speaking, there is selfishness, though of a laudable character, in the motives of the best of men; they, at least, look for the reward of a good conscience. 

Major hceredltas venit unicuique nostrum a jure et Irglbus, quam a parenfibus. Cic. — " We each of us receive a more valuable inheritance in our civil and legal rights, than any we derive from our fathers." 

Major privato visus, dum privatus fuit, et omnium consensu capax imperii, nisi imperdsset. Tacit. — " He appeared greater than a private individual, so long as he remained a private individual, and, by the consent of all, would have been deemed fit to rule had he never ruled." Said of the Emperor Galba. 

« Major rerum mihi nascitur ordo. Vibg. — " A more extended range of things presents itself to me." My views become enlarged. 

■Majuresque cadunt altis de montlbus umbrae. Vibg. — " And the shadows lengthen as they fall from the lofty mountains" — upon the approach of evening. 

Mala causa silenda est. Ovid. — " It is best to be silent in a bad cause." 

Mala conscientia etiam sblitudme anxia atque sollMta est. — " An evil conscience is anxious and solicitous, even in solitude." 

Mda fides.— ■" Bad faith." 

Mala gallina, malum ovum. Prov.—" Bad hen. bad egg." So Matt. vii. 16, " Do men gather grapes of thorns, or tigs of thistles?" 

Mala grammaflca non vltiat chartam. Coke. — " Bad grammar does not vitiate a deed." A deed is construed according to the manifest intention of the writer. 

Mala mali malo mala contiilit omnia mundo ,* Causa mali tantifcemtna solafuit. — "The jaw-bone of a bad man with the aid of an apple brought all evil into the world ; woman alone was the cause of all this evil." A play on the Latin words, mala, "a jaw-bone," malm, "bad," mdlum, " evil," and malum, "an apple." 

Mala mens, malm animus. Teh. — " Bad heart, bad disposition." 

Mala ultro adsunt. Pbov. — "Misfortunes come unsought." 

Male cuncta ministrat Impetus. Stat. — " Violence conducts everything badly." When we are influenced by passion, we do everything amiss. See Da spatium, &c. 

Male imperando summum imprrium amittltur. Syb. — " By bad government the supreme rule is lost." 

Male narrando fdbula depravutur. — " A story is spoiled by being badly told." 

Male partum male dispPrit. Platjt. — " Property ill got, ill spent." " Lightly come, lightly go." See De male quae*itis, &c. 

Male secum agit ceger, mPdicum qui harredem facit. Ste. — " The sick man does injustice to himself who makes his physician his heir." 

Male si manddta loqudris, Aut dormltdbo aut ridebo. Hob. — " If you pronounce the parts assigned you badly, I shall either fall asleep or laugh." Addressed to an actor in tragedy. 

Male verum exdminat omnis Corruptus judex. Hob. — " Every corrupt judge imperfectly examines into the truth." He shuts his eyes to such parts of the matter as do not suit his purpose. The poet is speaking of the intemperate man as ill qualified to judge of temperance. Male vivunt qui se semper vict~'ros putdnt. Syb. — " They live ill, who think they will live for ever." Because they 
are always deferring repentance and amendment. 

Maledicus a malefico non distat nisi occdsione. Qtttntill. — " An evil-speaker differs from an evil-doer in nothing but want of opportunity." A person who stabs our good name will not hesitate to stab the body if it suits his purpose, and he can insure impunity. 

MaPfacere qui vult, nusquam non causam inveniet. Stb. — " He who wishes to do evil will never be at a loss for a reason." See ^Esop's Fable of the "Wolf and the Lamb. 

Malesudda fames. Vieg. — " Hunger that persuades to evil." 

Mali princlpii malus finis. Tee. — " Bad beginnings have bad endings." 

Malim inquietam llbertdtem quam quietum servltium. — " I would prefer liberty with unquiet to slavery with quiet." The sentiments of a lover of freedom at any price. 

Malis avibus. — " With bad birds," i. e. "with a bad omen." 

MalUia est versfita etfallax ratio nocendi. Cic. — " Malice is a subtle and deceitful engine of mischief." 

Malo accepto stultus sapit. . JProv. — " After suffering an evil the fool becomes wise." " Experience is the mistress of fools." 

Malo benefit cere tantwndem est periculum Quantum bono male fit cere. Platjt. — " To do good to the bad is a danger just as great as to do bad to the good." 

Malo cum Platone errdre, quam cum aliis recte senttre. Cic. — " I had rather be wrong with Plato, than think aright with the others." 

Malo indisertam prudentiam, quam loqudcem stultitiam. ClC. — " I prefer ineloquent prudence to fluent folly." 

Malo malo malo malo. — "Malo, I would rather be Malo, in an apple tree, Malo, than a wicked man Malo, in adversity." A play upon the different meanings of apparently the same word. 

Malo milii male quam molllter esse. Sets'. — " I prefer being unfortunate to being effeminate." 

Malo nodo malus qucerendus cuneus. Prov. — " For a hard knot a hard tool must be sought." 

Malo si quid b^nrjocias, id brn^pcium intrrit, Bono si quid mid^fdcias, cetutvm expYtit. Plait. — "If you do any good to the bad, the benefit is lost at once if you do any bad to the good, it lasts for a length of time " 

Malorum facintrrum ministri qua.si exprobranfrs aspiciuniur. Tacit. — "The accomplices in evil action* are generally looked upon as our censors." There is no depeiideiKf upon them beyond the present moment. 

Malorum immensa vordgo ct gurges. ClC. — " A boundless abyss and gulf of evils." 

Malum bene conditum ne movHris. Prov. — " Do not disturb an evil that has been fairly buried." " Let well alone" — or, as we say, " Do not rip up old sores." 

Malum consilium consultori pessimum. Ver. Flaccus. — "Bad advice is most fatal to the adviser." Its ill effects are apt to recoil upon himself. See Nee enim, &c. 

Malum est consilium quod mutdri non potest. Syr. — " That is bad counsel, which cannot be changed." See Vestigia nulla, Ac. 

Malum in se. — " An evil in itself." That which is universally acknowledged to be bad among civilized men, and is stigmatized as such by the laws of nature. 

Malum nascens facile opprlmttur ; inveterdtum Jit robustius. Cic. — " An evil habit in the beginning is easily subdued, but when it becomes inveterate, it gains strength." 

Malum prohibitum. — " An evil from prohibition." That which is conventionally an evil, from being so defined by law ; such, for instance, as smuggling. 

Malum vas non frangitur. Prov. — " A worthless vessel does not get broken." " Nought comes to no harm." 

Malus bonum ubi se simiilat, tunc est pessimus. Syb. — " A bad man is worst of all, when he pretends to be a good one." Because we are not on our guard against him. 

Malus clandestinus est amor, damnum est merum. Plaut. — " Clandestine courtship is bad ; it is downright ruin." 

Malus est enim custos diuturnitatis metus, contraque benevolentia Jidelis vel ad perpetuitdtem. Cic. — " Fear is a bad preserver of that which is intended to endure ; on the other hand, considerateness will insure fidelity fcr ever." A contrast of the comparative results of despotic sway and free government. 

Malus malum vult, ut sit sui simUis. — " A. bad man wishes another to be bad, that there may be one like himself." 

Malus usus abolendus est. Law Max. — "An evil custom ought to be abolished." In states this should be done with a sense that every usage is not necessarily bad because it is old. 

Mandamus. Law Term. — " ~We command." A writ or command issuing from the Queen's Bench, commanding certain tilings to be done, which it lies within its power to enforce. 

Mandilre suspendium alicui. Apul. — " To bid a man go and be hanged." 

Mandrabiili more res succedit. Prov. — " The business goes on as as it did with Mandrabulus:" i. e. worse and worse. Mandrabulus was a man who found a treasure, on which he presented to Juno a golden ram, meaning to make a similar offering each year : but repenting of his liberality, the next year he offered one of silver, and the following, one of bronze. Hence this phrase, very similar to our say- 
ing, " Out of the frying-pan into the fire." 

Manebant vestigia morientis libertatis. Tacit. — " Traces still remained of expiring liberty." The spirit of freedom was not utterly crushed. 

Manet altd mente repostum, Judicium Parldis spretceque injuria formce. ViRG. — " There remains deeply seated in her mind the judgment 
of Paris, and the injustice done to her slighted beauty." In allusion to the vengeance of Juno. 

Mambus pedlbusque. — "With hands and feet." With all one's energies ; " With tooth and nail." 

Manlidna imperia. Prov. — "A Manlian order." In reference to Titus Manlius, who ordered his son to be scourged and beheaded for fighting contrary to orders. 

Mantua me genuit, Caldbri rapuere, tenet nunc Parthenope. Cectni pascua, rura, duces. — " Mantua bore me, Calabria witnessed my death, Parthenope [or Naples] now receives me. I sang of pastures, fields, and heroes." The epitaph of Virgil, written by himself, Donatus says, though without much appearance of probability. 

Mantua, vce ! mtserce nhnium vlc'ina Cremonce. Tiro. — "Mantua, alaa! how much too near to the unfortunate Cremona!" These words are said to have been most aptly quoted by Dean Swift, on seeing a valuable Cremona violin swept from a table to the floor by a lady's mantua or gown. 

Manuforti. — "With a strong hand." 

Manu scriptum. — "Written by the hand." Henoe our word manuscript — sometimes written MS. and in the plural MSS. 

Manum de tabuld ! — " Hands off the picture ! " Moaning that by touching and retouching you may at last injure a work. Said originally by Apelles to Protogenes, when still labouring to add to the beauties of a picture already beautiful. 

Manum non verterim, dlgltum non porrexfrim. — "I would not turn my hand, or hold out my finger for it." 

Manns manum fricat, etmanus manum lavat. Prov. — " Hand rubs hand, and hand washes hand." Nature teaches us that we were made to assist each other. 

Mare apertum. — " A sea open," — to commerce. 

Mare clausum. — "A sea shut up," — against the commerce of the world at large. 

Mare quidem commune certo est omnibus. Platjt. — " Surely the sea is common to all." 

Margarita e stercore. Prov. — " A pearl from a dunghill." 

Marmfireo Licinus tumulo jacet, at Cato parvo, Pompeius nullo. Quis putet esse deos? Saxa premunt Llcinum, levat altum Fama Catonem, 

Pompeium tituli. Credtmus esse deos. — " Licinus lies in a marble tomb, Cato in an humble one, Pompey in none. Who can think that the gods exist ? Heavy lies the stone on Licinus ; Fame raises Cato on high ; his glories, Pompey. We believe that the gods do 
exist." The first two lines are an epigram from the Latin Anthology in reference to the magnificent tomb of one Licinus, the slave and steward of Julius Caesar. The two lines in answer, which are equally good, are of more recent origin. 

Mars grdvior sub pace latet. Claud. — " A more serious warfare lies concealed beneath a show of peace." 

»——Martemaccendere cantu. Vibg.— "To kindle the var« fare by his note." Said of a trumpeter, and the effects of martial music. 

Mater ait natce, die natce, Fllia, natam Ut moneat natce, plangere flliolam. 

" The mother to her daughter spake, Daughter, said she, arise, Thy daughter to her daughter take, Whose daughter's daughter cries." 
A distich, according to Zuinglius, on a lady of the family of the Dalburgs, who saw her descendants to the sixth generation. 

Mater artium necessltas. Prov. — " Necessity is the mother of arts." Or, as we say, " Necessity is the mother of invention." 

Mater familias. — "The mother of a family." 

Muteriem, qua sis ingmibsus, Jiabes. Ovid. — "You have a subject on which to prove your ingenuity." 

Materiem superabat opus.- Ovid. — " The workmanship surpassed the material." The mechanical skill displayed rendered the material more than doubly valuable. 

Mature Jias senex, si diu veils esse senex. Prov. — " Tou must become an old man soon, if you would be an old man long." " Old young and old long." Tou must leave off the irregularities of youth early, if you wish to attain old age. Quoted by Cicero, De Senectute. 

MavHim mihi inimJcos invidere quam me inimicis meis : Nam invidere alii bene esse, tibi male esse, miseria est. Plaut. — " I had rather that my enemies shoidd envy me than I my enemies ; for to feel envy because it goes well with another, and badly with yourself, is wretchedness." 

Maxima debetur pueris reverentia. Jut. — " The greatest respect is due to youth." Everything said and done in the presence of youth should be weighed more carefully even than our conduct in the company of old age. It has its effect for good or for bad. 

Maxima illPc^bra est peccandiimpunitdtis spes. Cic. — "The greatest allurement to guilt, is the hope of escaping with impunity." It is the certainty of punishment that deters from the commission of crime. 

Maxima poena mihi est ipsum ojfondisxe Ovid.— " It is my greatest punishment to nave offended him."

Maxima quceque domus servis est plena tvperbu. Juv. — " Every great house is full of insolent servants." 

Maximas virtutes jacere omnes necesse est, voluptute dominante. Cic. — "Where a love of pleasure reigns paramount, the greatest of virtues must necessarily lie inactive." 

Maximus in minimis. — " Very great in very little things." The character of a laborious trifler. 

Me antehac Supremum habuisti cbmitem consiliis tuts. Plaut. — " Till now you have had me as the most ultimate sharer in your counsels." 

Me duce, damndsas, homines, compescite euros. Ovid. — " "With me for your guide, ye men, dispel your anxious cares." Me justum esse gratis oportet. Sen. — " It is my duty to be just without reward."

Me liceat casus misereri insontis amici ? Vino. — " May it be allowed me to pity the misfortunes of my guiltless friend ?" 

Me, me, adsum qui feci, in me convertite ferrum. Vino. — " On me ! on me ! here am I who did the deed, oh turn your sword on me." See Meafraus, &c. 

Me miserum ! paucas mdnui quod prosit in horas. Ovid. — " Wretched me ! I have been giving advice to be of use for a few hours only." 

Me non ordcula certum, Sed mors certafacit. — These words are part of a speech of Cato in Lucan, ii. 582. Cato says, Sortilegis egeant dubii, semperque futuris Casibus ancipites, me non oracula certum, Sed mors certafacit; pavido fortique cadendum est. — " Let Ihose who are doubtful, and always perplexed about future events, seek the aid of diviners ; as for me, it is not oracles that render me decided, but death, which is itself decided ; for the coward and the hero must perish alike." 

Me non solum piget stultifies me<E, sed etiam pudet. Cic. — " I am not only grieved at, but even ashamed of, my folly." 

Me Partiassi deserta per ardua duicis Haptat amor ; juvat ire jugis, qua nulla priorum Castdliam molli divertitur orblta clivo. VlRG. — " The sweet love [of the Muses] transports me along the lonely heights of Parnassus ; I delight to range those mountain-tops, where no path, trodden by the ancients, winds down to Castalia with gentle descent." 

Me pascant olivce, Me cichorea, levesque nialvce. Frui pardtis, et vdlido mihi, Lathe dones, et, precor, Integra Cum mente, nee turpem senectam Degere, nee cithdrd carentem. Hob. — " May olives support me, succory too and soft mallows. O son of Latona, grant me to enjoy what I have, and to possess my health, with an unimpaired understanding, I beseech thee; and not to pass a wretched old age, or 
deprived of my lyre." 

Mea culpa, Deus. — " My fault, God." A mediaeval expression, like our " God forgive me," used by a person when sensible of having done or said anything profane. 

-—Mea fraus omnis : nihil iste nee ausus, Nee potuit, caelum hoc, et conscia s'ider a test or. Virg. — " Mine is all the offence, he neither dared, nor could do, aught. This I call heaven and the conscious stars to witness." (See Me, me, adsum, &c.) The words of Nisus, when attempting to save Euryalus, in the 9th iEneid. A celebrated statesman, having quoted the passage, " Me, me, adsum" &c, was reminded by his opponent, that he had omitted the " Mea fraus omnis," which was much more applicable to him. 

Medrum rerum me novisse cequum est ordlnem, Platjt. — " It is right that I should know the state of my own circumstances." 

MecumfUcile redeo in grdtiam. Ph-2ED. — " I am easily reconciled to myself." 

Media inter prcelia semper Stelldrum, ccelique plagis, siiperisque vacdvi. LuCAN. — "Ever, amid battles, have I found time to contem- 
plate the stars, and the tracts of heaven, and the realms above." 

Medici, causa morbi inven id, curationcm invent am putant. Cic. — " Physicians think that, the cause of the disease being 
discovered, they have also discovered its cure." 

Medici gravibres morbos aspPris remediis entrant. Curt. — " Physicians cure severe diseases with sharp remedies." 

Medicus dedit qui tempbris morbo moram, Is plus rSmedii quam cutis sector dedit. — " The physician who gives to the disease time for cure, finds a better remedy than he who cuts the skin." A gradual cure is more desirable than recourse to violent remedies. 

Medio defonte lepbrum Surgit amdri aliquid'quod in ipsis flbribus angat. Lucret. — " From the midst of the very fountain oi delight something bitter arises, to vex us even amid the flowers themselves." " Full from the fount of j^y's delicious springs Some bitter o'er the flowers its bubbling venom flings." Cuilde Harold, c. i. § 82. 

Medio tutissimus ibis. Ovid. — " You will go most safely in the middle." By avoiding extremes you will insure comparative security. 

Mediucribus esse poi-tis Non Di, non homines, non concessere columnar. Hor. — "Mediocrity in poets not gods, nor men, nor book- 
sellers will permit." 

MPdibcritas est inter nimium et parwm. — " Mediocrity is the mean between too much and too little." 

Mel in ore, verba lactis, Fel in corde,fraus infactis. — " Honey in his mouth, words of milk, gall in his heart, fraud in his deeds." A Leonine couplet of the middle ages, descriptive of a hypocrite. 

MHior est conditio possidentis. Law Max. — " The condition of him who is in possession is the most advantageous." " Possession is nine points of the law," where the rights are equal. 

Mflior est conditio possidentis, ubi neuter jus habet. Law Max. — " "Where neither has a right, the condition of him who is in possession is the best." 

MPlior tutiorque est certa pax, quam sperdta victoria. Lrv. — " Certain peace is better and safer than expected victory." 

Meliora sunt ea quce natilrd, quam quae arte perfect a sunt. Cic. — "Those things which are perfect by nature are better than those which are made perfect by art." 

Melius est cavere semper, quam pati semel. Prov. — " It is better to be always on one's guard, than once to suffer." On the other hand, Julius Caesar used to hold that it was better to suffer once, than to be kept continually on the rack of apprehension. — Melius est pati semel, quam cavere semper. 

Melius est modo purgdre peccdta, et vltia resecdre, quam in futurum purganda reservdre. Th. a Kempis. — " It is better now to cleanse ourselves of our sins, and to lop off our vices, than to reserve them, to be cleansed at some future time." 

Melius est peccdta cavere, quam mortem fugere. Si hodie non es pardtus, quomodo eras eris ? Cras est dies incertus : et qui scis si crasilnum habebis ? Th. a Kempis. — " It is better to avoid sin, than to fly from death. If to-day you are not prepared, how will you be to-morrow ? To-morrow is an uncertain day, and how do you know whether you will have a to-morrow ?" 

MUius non tangere, clamo. Hor. — ** I give notice, 'tis best not to touch me." The words of a man who is on his guard against every attack. 

Melius, pejus, prosit, obsit, nil vident nisi quod libuerit. Teb. — " Better or worse, for their advantage or disadvantage, they 
see nothing but what they please." 

Mellltum venenum, blanda ordtio. Prov. — " A flattering speech is honied poison." It tends to disarm the person to whom it is addressed. 

Membra reformldant mollem quoque saucia tactum ; Yanaque sollicitis incutit umbra metum. OviD. — " The wounded limb shudders at even a gentle touch : and to the timid the unsubstantial shadow creates alarm." 

Memento mori. — " Remember you must die." Anything which reminds us of our end is called a memento mori. At; their banquets the Egyptians were in the habit of introducing a mummy or a skeleton, and addressing words to this effect to their guests. 

Memento semper finis, et quia perdltwm non redit tempxu. Th. \ K 1 m l'is. — •• Ahva\ i be in remembrance of your end, and that time lost never returns." 

«■ i M 'int omnia amantcs. Ovin. — "Lovers remember v\ entiling." 

Mniiordbllior prima pars vita; quam post r<~ via fuit. Livy. — "The first part of his life was more distinguished than the 
latter." Said of Scipio Africauus the Younger. 

Mfcnbrem immemorem facit, qui monet quod memor }n< : mlnit. Plaut. — " He who is continually reminding a man who has a good memory, makes him forget." 

Memoria est per quam mens rrpetit ilia qua •■ J'u< runt. ClC. — u The memory is that by which the mind recalls the things that have been." 

Memoria in arternd. — " In eternal remembrance." 

Memoria techntca. — " An artificial memory." "Words or signs adapted for aiding the memory. 

Mi iiddcem mPmbrem esse oportet. Qi'i>'T. — " A liar should have a good memory." 

Menddci hdmlni, ne. verum quidem dicenti credPre solemus. Cic. — " We are accustomed to give no credit to a liar, even when he tells the truth." Illustrated by the Fable of the Shepherd Boy and the Wolf. 

Mendici, mimi, balatrones. Hon. — " Beggars, buffoons, and scoundrels." " Tag, rag, and bobtail." 

Mendico ne parentes quidem am'tci sunt. Prov. — " To a beggar not even his own parents are friendly." Poverty has the effect of blighting the natural affections. 

Menefugis ? per ego has lachrymas dextramque tuam, te Per connubia nostra, per inceptos llymcnasos, 8i bene quid de te merui,fuit aut tibi quicquam Dulce meum, miserere domus labentis, et istam Oro, siquis adhuc precibus locus, exue mentem. Vieg. — " Dost thou fly from me ? I conjure thee, by these tears, by thy own right hand, by our marriage rites, by our newmade wedding tie, if ever I have deserved well of thee, or if aught of my charms were sweet unto thee, pity my falling house, and if there is still any room for my prayers, lay aside, I beseech thee, this thy intention." Dido thus appeals to ^neas, when he is about to abandon her, and 
fly from Carthage. 

Mene sails plactdi vultum fluctusque quietos Ignordre jubes ? Miene huic confidPre monstro ? Viho. — " Dost thou command me not to understand the countenance of the placid ocean and the waves ? Am I to put any faith in this monster ? " 

Mensdgitat molem Vieg. — " A mind informs the mass." 

Mens bona regnum posstdet. Prov. — " A good mind possesses a kingdom." " My mind to me a kingdom is." The motto of the Emperor Nerva. 

Mens conscia recti. — " A mind conscious of rectitude." See Conscia mens recti, &c. 

Mens cujusque is est quisque. — " The mind of the man is the man himself." 

Mens immota manet, lachrymae volvuntur inanes. Vieg. — " His mind remains unmoved. Tears are shed of no avail." 

Mens Interrita lethi. Ovid. — " A mind unawed by death." The feelings of a good man in his last moments. 

Mens Invlcta manet. — " The mind remains unsubdued." This is especially proved in the case of those who have died martyrs for their faith. 

Mens peccat, non corpus, et unde consilium abfiilt culpa abest. Liv. — " The mind sins, not the body, and where reason is wanting there is no criminality." Hence it is that lunatics are not subject to the penal laws.

Mens sine pondere ludit. — " The mind is playful when free from pressure." 

Mensque pati durum sustinet cegra nihil. Ovid. — * A mind diseased can bear nothing that is harsh." Its susceptibility is increased by suffering. 

Mensuraque juris Vis erat. Lucan. — " And might was the measure of right." This takes place in the lawless days of anarchy. 
' Mentis gratisslmus error. Hoe. — " A most delightful reverie of the mind." See Pol me, &c. 

Mentis phiHralia. Claud. — " The inmost recesses of the mind." The secret thoughts of the heart. 

Meo sum pauper in cere. Hoe. — " I am poor, but at my "own expense." Though I am poor, I am out of debt. 

Merces virtutis laus est. Prov. — " Praise is the reward oi virtue." 

Merx ultronea putet. Prov. — " Proffered wares stiuk." Quoted by St. Jerome, and meaning that proffered services are despised. In either case we are apt to suspect the sincerity of the person making the offer. 

M*>sse tenus prUprid vive. Pees. — " Live within your own harvest. Live within your means. 

Messis erant primis vtrldes mortdlibus herba^ Quas tcllus nullo sollicitante dabat. Ottd. — " Green grass, which the earth yielded, unsolicited by man, was, to the first mortals, in place of harvest." 

Mi'trri se quemque suo modulo ac pede verum est. Hon. — " It is just that every man should estimate himself by his own measure and standard." Stretch your arm no further than your sleeve will reach. 

Meum and tuum. — "Mine and thine." The "law of mewn and tuum" means " the law of property ;" in contradistinction to what is called at the present day communism or socialism. 

JfinMM est propfmtum in tabernd mori ; Vinum sit appositum morientis ori. — " In a house of carousal, well primed will I die, 
With the cup to my lips, while expiring I lie." 

The commencement of the so-called drinking-song of "Walter Mapes. It consists of some stanzas selected from his Golice Confessio. 

Meus mihi, suus cuique est cams. Plaut. — " Mine is dear to me, and dear is his own to every man." 

Micat inter omnes. Hoe. — " It shines above all." These words have been used as a punning inscription under the picture of a favourite cat. " My cat above all others." 

Mlgrdvit ah aure voluptas Omnis. Hob. — " All pleasure has fled from the ear." Said m reference to those who preferred pantomimic exhibitions on the stage to the dialogue of the legitimate drama. 

Mihi forsan, tibi quod negdvit, Porriget bora. J I jr. — "Time may, perhaps, extend to me that which it has denied to thee." 

Mihi istic nee seritur nee metitur. Plaut. — " There is neither sowing nor reaping for me in this matter." 

——Mihi res, non me rebus, subjungere conor. Hob. — " I endeavour to make events submit to me, and not to submit myself to them." 

< Mihi tarda Jluunt ingrdtaque tempora Hob. — " The time flies slowly and heavily to me." 

MUUat omnis amans. Ovid. — " Every lover is a soldier." The lover requires vigilance, wariness, resolution, and fortitude. Ovid wrote his " Art of Love" to instruct in this kind of warfare. 

MiliticB species amor est. Ovid. — " Love is a kind of warfare." 

Mille animos exctpe rnille modis. Ovid. — " Treat a thousand dispositions a thousand different ways." 

Mille hominum species et rerum discolor usus ; Velle suum cuique est, nee voto vivitur uno. Pees. — " There are a thousand kinds of men, and different hues in the colour of things ; each one follows his own inclination, nor do they all agree in their desires." It is one of the most admirable dispensations of Providence, that the tastes of men are suited to the infinite variety of circumstances. See Quot homines, &c. 

Mille modi Veneris. Ovid. " A thousand-fold are the ways of love." 

Mille trahens vdrios adverso sole colores. Vieg. — " Drawing a thousand colours from the opposite sun." Said of the rainbow. 

Millia frumenti tua triverit area centum, Non tuus hoc capiet venter plus ac mens. Hob. — " Though your threshing-floor should yield a hundred thousand bushels of corn, your belly will none the more hold more than mine." 

Mindtur innocentlbus qui parcit nocentlbus. Coke. — " He threatens the innocent who spares the guilty." 

Minor est quam servus, dominus qui servos timet. — " A master who fears his servants is lower than a servant." He should take care therefore not to put himself in their Dower. 

Mi intent ttr alrce up curee. Hob. — •• Black cares will be soothed by verse." 

Mlnuit prcesentia famam. Claud. — " Our own presence diminishes the exaggeration of report." See Majore longinquo, &c., and Vindictam, &c. 

.Mi, i us afTioit sensus fit tig tit io quam cogitdtio. Quint. — " Bodily fatigue affects the mind less than deep thought." 

Minus aptus aciltis Ndribus horum homlnum. Hon. — " Not proof against the sharp-witted sneers of these men." 

Minus in parvos fort una furit, Uriusque ferit leviora Deus. Sen. — " Fortune rages less against the humble, and God strikes 
more lightly the lowly." See the Fable of tte Oak and the Thistle. 

Minilti Semper et infirmi est iiriimi exlguique voluptas Lltio. Jut. — " Revenge is always the pleasure of a narrow, diseased, 
and little mind." Any person capable of thinking twice must see that no practical utility can result from the gratification of revenge. 

Minutice. — " Trifles." Meaning the most minute and trifling circumstances connected with any matter. 

Minfitiila pliivia imbrem parit. Prov. — " Many little drops make a shower." " Many littles make a mickle." 

Mira cano ; sol occubuit, nox nulla secuta est. — "Wonders I sing ; the sun has set, no night has ensued." See Sol occubuit, &c. 

Mira qucedam in cognoscendo sudvltas et delectdtio. — " There is a certain wonderful gratification and delight in gaining knowledge." 

Mirdbtle dictu. Virg. — " "Wonderful to be told." 

Mirdmur ex intervallo fallentia. Prov. — " We admire at a distance things which are deceptive." Both morally and physically the sight is often deceived by objects beheld from a distance. " "Tis distance lends enchantment to the view." See Major e, &c, and Minuit prcesentia, &c. 

Mirantur taciti, et diibio pro fuhnine pendent. Statius.— " In silence they are amazed, and stand in expectation of 
tlie thunderbolt, doubtful where it shall fall." 

Miris modis Di ludos faciunt homlntbtis ; 

Mirisque exemplis somnia in somnis danunt. Plaut. — " In wondrous ways do the gods make sport of men ; and in wondrous fashions do they send dreams in sleep." 

Misce stultitiam consiliis brevem. Hon. — " Mingle a little gaiety with your grave pursuits." " Be merry and wise." 

MlsPra est magni custodia census. Juv. — " The charge of a great estate is a misery." If the duties of the owner are properly attended to they will entail labour, if neglected he must make up his mind to be robbed. 

MlsPra est servltus ubijus est aut vagum aut incognitum. Law Max. — " Servitude is a wretched state where the law is either undefined or unknown." 

MlsPra mors sdpienti non potest accldPre. Cic. — " A wretched death cannot fall to the lot of a wise man." To him death, in whatever shape, will be welcome. 

MlsPram pacem vel bello bene mutdri. Tacit. — " A peace that is productive of wretchedness, may be profitably exchanged for war." The one is a certain evil, from the other good may result. 

Mlseri, quibus Intentdta nites. Hon. — " Wretched are they to whom you, untried, seem fair ! " They will be sadly duped on finding your beauty accompanied by deceit and ingratitude. 

MlsPricordia Domini inter pontem et fontem. St. Augustin. — " Between bridge and stream the Lord's mercy may be found." True repentance, though at the last moment, will find favour in the sight of God. 

MisPris succurrere disco. Virg. — " I have learned to succour the wretched." See Haud ignara, &c. 

Miserrlma est fortiina quce inimlco caret. Sye. — " Most wretched is the fortune of him who has not an enemy." Meaning that to be envied by none, a man must be low down, in the world indeed. 

Miserrlma isihcec misPria est servo bono, Apud herum qui vera loquitur, si id vi verum vincitur. Plaut — " It is the greatest of misfortunes to a good servant, who is telling the truth to his master, if that same truth is overpowered by violence." 

Miserrtmum est time^e cum speres nihil. Sen. — " It is a most wretched thing to be in dread, when you have nothing to hope for." 

MMrwm est aliend vititre quadrd. Jut. — " "Wretched is it to live at the expense of another." 

Mteerum est aliorum incumbere famce, Ne collapsa ruant subductis tecta columnis. Juv. — " It is wretched to be dependent on another's fame ; the chance is, that the props by which you are supported will be withdrawn, and the roof come tumbling down in one common ruin." 

Mistrum est opus, Jgitur demum fodere puteum, ubi sitis fauces tenet. Plaut. — " It is a shocking thing to have to dig a well at the last moment, just when thirst has seized your throat." The disadvantage of having deferred till the last moment a matter of vital importance. 

Mist-rum istuc verbum et petsimum est, Sabuisse, et nihil habere. Plaut. — " A shocking expression that, and a most grievous one, 
1 1 had, and I have not.' " 

Mitte ambos nudos ad ignotos, et videbis. — " Send them both naked among strangers, and then you will see." The old rule (attributed by Bacon, in his Apophthegms, to " one of the philosophers,") for knowing a fool from a wise man. See the Fable of Simonides preserved from Shipwreck, in Phsedrus. 

Mitte hanc de pectore curam. ViEG. — " Dismiss these anxieties from your breast." 

Mitte superba pati fastidia, spemque caducam Di spice ; vive tibi, nam moriiire tibi. Sen. — " Cease to endure a patron's proud insolence, and despise all transitory hopes ; live for yourself, for for yourself you will die." 

Mittimus. Law Term. — " We send." A writ for the removal of records from one court to another, also a precept in writing, under which a person accused of a crime is committed to prison by a justice of the peace. 

Mobllis et vdria est ferine nature/ malorum. Jut. — " The nature of evils is generally variable and changing." 

Mobilitdte viget, viresque acquirit eundo. VlBG. — " It lives by moving, and gains strength as it goes." Said with 
reference to the activity of Rumour, which gains strength as it travels. 

Mbbilium turba Quir'dium. Hob. — " A crowd of fickle citizens." The mob, so called from their mobilitas, or fickleness. 

Moderdri animo et ordtioni, cum sis irdtus, non mediocris in-genii est. Cic. — " To keep the mastery over your indignation and language, when you are angry, is no mean effort of the mind." 

Moderdta durant. Sen. — "Things enjoyed in moderation last long." Whereas excess entails speedy exhaustion. 

Modeste tamen et circumspecto judicio de tantis viris pronunciandum est, ne, quod plerisque accidit, daninent qua non 
intelligunt. Quintill. — " We should, however, pronounce our opinions with reserve and cautious judgment, concerning such eminent men, lest, as is the case with many, we should be condemning what we do not understand." 

Modestia fames neque su/mmis rnortdlibus spernenda est. Tacit. — " Fame is not to be despised by even the most eminent of men, if sought with modesty." A high reputation is a legitimate object of ambition so long as it is sought by fair means. 

Modo me Thebis, modo ponit Athenis. Hob. — " He now places me at Thebes, now at Athens." Said of a dramatic writer, whose art and talent enable him to carry his audience along with him whenever he changes the scene. 

Modus omnibus in rebus optimum est hdbltu. Plaut. — " A medium is best to be observed in all things." See Est modus, &c. 

Modus operandi. — " The mode of operation." The way in which a thing is done. 

Molesta et importuna salutantium frequentia. — " A troublesome and annoying crowd of persons paying their court." 

Molle meum levibus cor est violdbile telis. Ovid. — " My tender heart is vulnerable by his light arrows." In allusion to the darts of Cupid. 

■ ■ Mollia tempora fandi. Hob. — " The favourable moment tor speaking." There is a season for everything, and among them, for asking a favour. 

Mollis educdtio nervos omnes et mentis et corporis fraiu/it. Quint. — " An effeminate education weakens all the powers hoth of mind and hody." 

Mollis in obsequium facilisque roganfibus esses. Ovid.— " You should be kindly obsequious and yielding to any entreaties." 

^—Mollissima corda ILilmdno fXltM dare se ndturafat'tur, Quae lachrymas dedit. Juv. — '• Nature confesses that she has bestowed on man a most susceptible heart, in that she has granted tears." 

Molllter austiro studio fallente laborem. Hob. — "While your eagerness in the pursuit beguiles fatigue." 

— ■ — Molliter ossa cubent. Ovid. — " Softly may his bones repose." 

Momento mare verf/tur ; Eddem die ubi luserunt, ndvlgia sorbentur. — " In a moment the sea is changed, and on the same day 
on which they have gaily sported along, ships are swallowed up." Human life and the lot of the sailor are equally 
subject to vicissitudes. 

Mohtti, melibra sequdmur. Virg. — " Advised, let us follow better counsels." 

Mons cum monte non miscebltur. Prov. — " Mountain will not mingle with mountain." Haughty persons will rarely agree. 

Wons partiirlbat, gPmttus immdnes dens, Eratque in terris maxima expectatio, At ille murem prperit. Pitjed. — "A mountain was in labour, sending forth dreadful groans, and there was in the districts the highest expectation. But after all, it brought forth a mouse." See Parturiunt montes, &c. 

Monstra eventrunt mihi ! Introiit in cedes ater alienus canis ! Anguis per impluvium decidit de tegulis ! Galllna cPclnit ! Teb. — " Prodigies have befallen us ! A strange black dog came into the house ! a snake came down from the tiles through the sky-light! a hen crowed!" All these were bad omens with the ancients.

Monstrum horrendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen ademphnn. Vieg. — " A monster horrible, misshapen, huge, and deprived of his eye." The description given by Virgil of the Cyclops Polyphemus, after his one eye had been put out by Ulysses with a red-hot spit.

Monstrum nulla virtute redemptum A vltiis. Juv. — " A monster whose vices are not redeemed by a single virtue." 

Mora omnis odio est, sed facit sdpientiam. Syr. — " All delay is distasteful, but it produces wisdom."

Morbi perniciores sunt ariimi quam corporis. Cic. — " The diseases of the mind are more hurtful than those of the body." 

More majdrum. — " After the manner of our ancestors." 

More suo. — " After his usual manner." 

Mores deteriores increbrescimt, nee qui amici, qui infideles sint, pernoscas. Plaut. — " Bad manners gain apace, nor can you distinguish who are your friends, and who are false to you."

Mores dispdres dispdria studia sequuntur. Cic. — " Persons of dhTerent manners follow different pursuits." "Every man to his taste." See Non omnia, &c. 

Mores multbrum vidit. Hob. — " He saw the manners of many men." Said of Ulysses. 

Mori est fel'icis, antequam mortem invocet. Syb. — " He who dies before he calls for death is a happy man." 

-——Moridmur, et in media anna rudmus. Vieg. — " Let us die, and rush into the thick of the fight." See Hysteron proteron. 

Mortbus antlquis stat Soma. — " Rome stands by ber ancient manners." The stability of the Roman republic "was based on the simplicity of the manners of its citizens, and their resistance to all innovations.

Morlbus et forma conciliandus amor. Ovid. — " Pleasing manners and good looks conciliate love." 

Mors et fugdeem persequltur virum, Nee parcit imbellis juventce JPopltfibus, timidoque tergo. Hon. — " Death pursues the man as he flies, nor spares the trembling knees of the unwarlike youth, or his timiil back." The impartial advance of death, who strikes down 
all before him, the coward equally with the brare. 

Mors et vita in mantbus lingua. Prov. — " Life and death are in the hands of the tongue." 

Morsjdnua vita. — " Death is the gate of life," ». e. of everlasting life. 

Mors omnibus communis. — " Death is the common lot of all." 

Mors sola fat etur Quantiila sint h&mtnum corpuscula. Juv. - " Death alone discloses how insignificant are the puny bodies of us men." Death, the universal leveller, shows the emptiness of human pride and ambition, and the feebleness ot man. 

Mors ultima linea rerum est. Hob. — " Death is the closing limit of human affairs." 

Mortdlia acta nunquam Deos fallunt. — " The deeds of man never deceive the gods." 

Mortdlia facta peribunt ; Nedum sermonum stat honos et gratia vivax, Multa renascentur qua jam cPcidere, cadentque Qua nunc sunt in hondre vocdbula, si volet usus, Quern penes arbitrium est, etjus, et norma loquendi. Hob. — " Mortal works must perish ; much less can the honour and elegance of language be long-lived. Many words shall revive which have now fallen into disuse, and many shall fall into disuse which are now esteemed, if it is the will of custom, in whose power is the decision, and the right to form the standard of correct speaking." 

Mortdlis nemo est, quern non attingai dolor morbusque. — " There is no mortal being whom grief and disease cannot reach." 

Mortalitdte relictd vivit immortalitdte induius. — "Mortality left behind, he lives clothed in immortality." 

Mortem Parca affert, opes rursus ac facultdtes aufert. — " Fato brings death, and deprives us of wealth and riches." 

Mortua manus. Law Term. — " Mortmain." Lands which were transferred to ecclesiastical corporations, and thereby became inalienable and not liable to secular services, were said to be, so far as the community at large was concerned, placed in onortud manu, " in a dead man's hand." There is, however, some doubt as to the origin of the term. 

Mortuis non conviciandum. Prov. — " We must not speak ill of the dead." See De mortuis, &c. 

Mortuo leoni et IPpores insnltant. Prov. — " Even hares insult a dead lion." It is only a poor-spirited creature that will insult departed greatness. See the Fable of the Aged Lion and the Ass, in Phaedrus, B. i. F, 21. 

Mortutm flagellar. Prov. — " You are beating a dead man." Said to one who reproves a man incorrigibly wicked. 

Mortuus per somnum vacdbis curis. " Having dreamed that you are dead you will be free from care." This was a current opinion of the ancient Greeks, and still prevails with some superstitious persons. 

Mos est oblivisci hommibus, neqne novisse, cujus nihili sit faciunda gratia. Plaut. — " It is the fashion for persons to forget and not to know him whose favour is esteemed as worth nothing." 

Mos pro lege. Law Max. — " Usage for law." Long established usage is the basis of our common law. 

Motus in fine velocior. — " Motion, towards its conclusion, is more swift." The law of tailing bodies. 

Mbvet cornicula risvm Furtwis nudata coloribus. Hoe. — " The crow, deprived of its stolen colours, excites our laughter." A picture of the detected hypocrite or braggart. 

Mugltus labyrinthi. Prov. — " The roaring of the labyrinth." A phrase used at Borne, to signify any common topic or hackneyed subject; this being a favourite theme with wretched poets. 

Mulgere hircum. Prov. — " To milk a he-goat." To attempt an impossibility. 

■ Mulier cupido quod dicit amanti, In vento et rapida scribere oportet aqud. Catull. — " What a woman says to an anxious lover, ought to be written on the winds and the water as it swiftly flows." In allusion to the fickleness of the fair sex; but more particularly the fair sex of ancient Bome. 

Mulier profecto nata est ex ipsd rnord. Plaut. — " Woman is surely born of tardiness itself." 

Mtlier qua sola cdgltat male cogltat. Prov. — " A woman who meditates alone, meditates to evil purpose." 

Miilier turn bene olet ubi nihil olet. Plaut. — " A woman smells sweetly, when she smells of nothing at all." 

Multa cadunt inter ccittcem suprrmaque labra. Labi " Many things fall between the cup and the edge ot tne lips." To the same purpose as our favourite proverb, " There is many a slip 'Twixt the cup and the lip." 

Multa dies, variusque labor mutnbUis eevi, jRrtiilit in melius ; multos alterna revtseng Lusit, et in soltdo rursus fort una locdvit. VlHO. — " The lapse of time, and the varying revolutions of changing years, have improved manv things, and capricious fortune, after many changes, has placed them once igMl on a solid basis." In allusion to the changing ilistinies of states, and the transitions from anarchy to peace and order. 

Multa diiique tuli : vttiis patientia victa est. Ovid. — " Much and long time have I suffered ; by your faults is my patience overcome." 

Multa docet fames. Prov. — " Hunger teaches many things." To the same effect as "Necessity is the mother of invention." 

Multa et praeclnra minantis. Hob. — " Threatening things many and great." Of great and wondrous promise. 

Multa ferunt anni vPnientes commoda secum ; 

Multa recedentes adimunt. Hob. — " Our years as they a<Nance bring with them many advantages ; as they recede they take many away." Our early years are gilded by the pleasures of hope and antici' pation : our declining ones are embittered either by satiety 
or disappointment. 

Multa gemens. Vibg. — " Deeply lamenting." Said of one who relates a sorrowful tale. 

Multa me docuit usus, magister egrpgius. Plin. the Younger. — " Necessity, that excellent master, hath taught me many things." 

Multa novit vulpes, sedfelis unum magnum. Prov. — " A i'ox knows many things, but a cat one great thing." Said by the cat, who could climb the tree and so escape the hounds, while the bragging fox could only run for it. See Art varia, &c. 

Multa petentibus Desunt multa. Hoe. — " Those who desire much are in want of much." The number of our wants (not our necessities) is in proportion to the extent of our desires. 

Multa prceter spem scio multis bona evenisse. Plaut. — " I know that many a lucky thing has happened to many a one beyond his hopes." 

Multa quidem scripsi ; sed quae vitiosa putdvi, Emenddturis igriibus ipse dedi. Ottd. — " Much did I write ; but what I considered faulty 1 myself committed to the all-correcting flames." 

Multa rogant utenda dari ; data reddere nolunt. Ovid.— " They ask for many a sum to be lent them ; but when it is lent they are loth to repay." 

Multa senem circumveniunt incommbda. — " Many inconveniences surround the aged man." 

Multa videmus Qu(B miser et frugi non fecit Apicius. Jut. — " We see many things which even Apicius (mean and stingy compared with him) never was guilty of." 

Multa viri nequicquam inter se vulnera jactant, Multa cavo lateri ingemmant, et pectbre vastos Dant sbnitus ; erratque aures et tempora circum Crebra manus • duro crepitant sub vulnere malce. VlEG. — " The men deal many blows to one another with erring 
aim, and many redouble on their hollow sides ; from their breasts the thumps resound, and round their ears and temples thick blows at random fly ; their jaws crack beneath the heavy hits." 

MultcB manus onus leoius faciunt. Prov. — " Many hands make a burden light." 

Multce terricolis linguae, ccelestlbus una. — " The inhabitants of earth have many tongues, those of heaven but one." A much quoted line, written by the late Kev. H. Carey of the British Museum. 

Multdrum palmdrum causidtcus. — " A pleader who has gained many victories." 

Multas a?ni<*itias silentium dtrvmit. Prov. — " Silence severs 7r.h,tiY friendships." It requires considerable energy and wannth of feeling long to maintain a correspondence with tr lends at a distance. See Non sunt amici, Ac. 

Multi adorantur in ard qui cremantur in igne. St. Atjgustin. — " Many are worshipped at altars, who are burning in tlames." Not every man that has been canonized is really a saint. 

Multi Committunt eddem diverso crlmtnafato. Juv. — " Many men commit the same crimes, with very different fates." See Hie crucem, Ac. 

Multi more isto at que exemplo virunt, quos cum censeas Esse amlcos, repfriuntur falso Jalsimoniis. Plaut. — " Many live after this manner and method ; when you think them to be your friends, they are found to be false with their deceitfulness." 

Multi multa, nemo omnia novit. Coke. — " Many people know many things, no one everything." 

(Multi) nil rectum nisi quod pldcuit sibi ducunt. Hon.— " Many esteem nothing right, but what pleases themselves." 

M ulti si pauca rogdbunt, JPostmodo de stipuld grandis acervus erit. Otid. — " If many ask for but a little, very soon will a heap be 
formed from the gleanings." " Many littles make a mickle." 

Multi te ode'rint si teipsum ames. — " Many will hate you if you love yourself." Selfishness and self-love beget hatred and contempt. ~Y 

Multi tristantur post deltoids, convivia, diesfestos. — " Many persons feel dejected after pleasures, banquets, and holidays." 

Multis commoditdttbus et elegantiis, suas cedes commodibres aptioresque fecit. Cic. — " By many appliances and elegancies, he has rendered his house more commodious and convenient." 

Multis Me bonis Jlebllis occidit Nulli JleVilior quam tibi Hon. — " He died lamented by many good men, by none more lamented than by thee." 

Multis minatur, qui uni facit injuriam. Syb.— " He who injures one, threatens many." 

Multis pardsse dlvltias non finis miser idrum fuit, sed mntdtio; non est in rebus vltium sed in ariimo. Sen - . — " To have be- 
come possessed of riches, is, to many, not the end of their miseries, but a change in them ; the fault is, not in the riches, but in the disposition." 

Multis terrlbUis caveto multos. Ausok. — " If you are terrible to many, then beware of many." The number of your enemies is proportionably increased. 

Multitudlnem decern faciunt. Coke. — " Ten make a multitude." 

Multo melius ex sermone quam lineamentis, de mbrtbus humt~numjudicdre. — " It is much better to judge of men's characters from their words than their features." 

Multo plures satietas quam fames perdldit viros. — " Surfeit has killed many more men than hunger." 

Multorum annbrum opus. — " The labour of many years." 

Multorum mdnlbus grande levdtur opus. — " By the hands of many a great work is made easy." See Multce manus, &c 

Mult os castra juvant, et Tttno tubce Permistus sonltus, bellaque mdtribus Detestdta. Hok. — " The camp, and the sound of the trumpet mingled with that of the clarion, and war, detested by mothers, have delights for many." 

Multos ingrdtos invenimus, plures filclmus. Prov. — " We find many men ungrateful; we make still more." By throwing the opportunity of showing themselves ungrateful in the way of undeserving persons. 

Multos in summa perlcnla misit Ventnri timor ipse mali. LuC-iy. — " The very fear of approaching evil has driven many into 
peril." See Incidit in Scyllam, &c. 

Multos qui conflictdri adversis videantur, bedtos ; ac plerosque, quanquam magnas per opes, miserrlmos ; si illi gravemfor- 
tilnam constanter tolerent, hi prosperd inconsulte utantur. Tacit. — " Many who appear to be struggling against ad- 
versity, are happy ; and more, although possessed of great wealth, are most wretched. The former support their adverse fortune with firmness, the latter inconsiderately abuse their prosperity." 

Multos timere debet quern tnulti timent. Ste.- -" He of whom many are afraid has reason to be afraid of many." See Multis terribilis, &c. 

Multum abludit imago. Hob. — "The picture is most ludicrously unlike." 

Multum demissus homo. Hon. — "An extremely reserved man." 

Multum habet jucundit/ltis soli corligue mutntio. Puny the Younger. — "Change of soil and climate is productive >>t' considerable pleasure." 

Multum ille periclitdtur, qui in negotiationem marlfimam pecuniam impendit suam. — " He runs many risks who exp his money on maritime speculations."

Multum in parvo. — " Much in little." Much in a little compass. A compendium. 

Multum supit qui non due dftfpit. Prov. — "He is very wise who does not long persist in tolly." This is said, taking into consideration the limited extent of the human powers of discernment. 

Multum te opinio Jail it. Cic. — " Your opinion is extremely fallacious." 

Mundceque pat vo sub lare pauprrum Ccen&, sine aulais et ostro, Sollicltam expllcuere Jrontem. Hob. — " A cleanly meal in the little cottage of the poor has smoothed an anxious brow, without hangings and purpie." 

Munditice, et orndtus, et cultus, hcec fceminurum insignia sunt, his gaudent el gloriantur. Livv. — "Neatness, ornament, and dress, are distinctions^peculiar to women ; in these they delight and glory."

Munditiis caphnur. Ovio. — " "We are captivated by neatness." 

Mundus scena, vita transltus, venisfi, vidisti, abiisti. — " Thia world is a stage, and life your walk across ; you have come, you have seen, you are gone." 

Mundus universus exercet histrionem. Petbon. Abb. — "AH men practise the player's art." So Shakspeare — " All the world 's a stage, 
And all the men and women merely plavers." As You Like It.

Munera ccclpit frequens, remittit xunquam. Plaut. — 'He often receives presents, but never makes them in return." 

MunP.rum animus opflmus est. Prov. — " Goodwill is the best of gifts." The goodwill of the giver constitutes the real value of the gift. 

Munus Apolline dignum. Hor. — "A present worthy of Apollo." A compliment to a meritorious poem. 

Munus orndre verbis. Ter. — " To enhance the value of a present by one's words." To double the value of a gift by the grace with which it is presented. 

Muri coctiles. Ovid. — "Walls of brick;" and not "cocktailed mice," a translation facetiously suggested in the " Art of Pluck." 

Mus in pice. — " A mouse in pitch." A man who is always immersed in useless researches : Swift's dirty philosopher of Lagado in " Gulliver's Travels," for instance. 

Mus non uni Jidet antro. Plaut. — " The mouse does not trust to one hole only." 

Musceo contingere cuncta lepore. Ltjceet. — " To touch upon everything with a lively wit." 

Mustt'lam habes. Prov. — " Tou have a weasel (in your house)." To meet a weasel was considered an omen of misfortune. 

Mutatis mutandis. — " Changing what should be changed." A warrant made out against B will do for E, mutatis mutandis, i. e. changing one name for the other. 

Mutdto nomine, de te Fubula narrdtur. Hob. — " Change but the name, the story 's told of you." Such was the gist of Nathan's parable to David. 

Mutidna cautio. — "The quirks" or "cozenage of Mutius." In allusion to Mutius Scaevola, the great Roman lawyer. 

Mutum est pictura poema. — " A picture is a poem without words." See Si poema, &c, and. Ut pictura poesis, &c. 











N. 

N. B. See Nota bene. 

Nee am'icum castigdre ab merttam noxiam 

Immune est f acinus. PtAUT. — " To reprove one's friend for a fault that deserves it, is decidedly a thankless task." 
Ncevia sex cydthis, septem Just'ma bibritur. Mart. — " Let 

Na>via be toasted with six cups, Justina with seven." 

Nam bonum consilium surrijutur sapisslme, Si minus cum curd aut cote locus loquendi lectus est. Pla it. — " For a well-devised plan is very often filched away, if the place for deliberating has not been chosen with care or caution." 

Nam curiusus nemo est, quin idem sit malPvSlus. Platjt. — " For no person is a busy-body, but he is ill-natured aa well." 

Nam de millefabce mfidiis dum surripis unum, Damnum est, non /acinus, mihipacto h'nius isto. Hor. — " For when from a thousand bushels of beans you steal a single one, the loss to me is trifling, but none the less is the crime on your part." Although the law does not take cognizance of extreme trifles, still, morally speaking, if there is the animus furandi, " the intention to steal," the guilt is the same. 

Nam ego ilium pPriisse duco, cui quidem periit pudor. Plaut. " For I consider that man to be lost who is lost to shame." 

Namet majorum institfda tuPri,sacris cerimoniisque rPtine iu$u t sdpientis est. — " For it is the part of a wise man to defend the institutions of his forefathers, and uphold the sacred rites and ceremonies." 

Nam et stulte facPre et stulte ftibuldrier, Utrumque in astute haud bonum est. Plaut. — " For to act unwisely and to talk unwisely, are neither of them profitable at times." 

Nam mora dal vires, tenPras mora percX-quit uvas , Et vdlidas segPtes, quodfuit herba,facit. OviD. — "For time supplies strength; time thoroughly ripens the tender grapes ; and it makes that into standing corn which was before only blades of grass." 

Nam non est verisimtle hommem paupPrem Pauxillum parvi facer e, quin nwnmum petat. Plaut. — " For it is not very likely that a poor man would despise ever such a trifle, and not be glad of a piece of money." 
Nam nunc mores nihil Jaciunt quod licet, nisi quod lubet. Plattt. — " For now-a-days it is the fashion to reckon of no value what is proper, but only what is agreeable." 

Nam pro jucundis aptissima quceque dabunt Di ; Cdrior est Mis homo quam sibi. Jut. — " For the gods will bestow what is most suitable, rather 
than what is agreeable ; man is more dear to them than 
he is to himself." 

Nam qui injuste impetum in quempiam facit, aut ird, aut (iTt-qud perturbdtibne incitdtus, is quasi manus afferre videtur socio. Cic. — " For when a man, in the heat of anger, or agitated by some other cause, makes an attack upon another unjustly, it would seem as though he had laid hands upon an ally." Because man is a social animal. 

Nam sapiens quidem pol ipsius fingit Fortunam sibi. Platjt. — " The prudent man really frames his own fortunes for himself." 

Nam scelus intra se taciturn qui cogltat ullum Facti crimen habet. Jtjy. — " For he who secretly meditates a crime within himself, has all the guilt of the deed." The animus, and not the act, constitutes the crime ; although the laws of man can only take cognizance of the animus when manifested by the act. 

Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur ; optimus ille est, Qui minimis urgetur. Hoe. — " For no man is born without faults ; he is the best 
who is beset by the fewest." 

Namque inscUia est Adversum stimulum calces. Teh. — " For it is mere folly to kick against the spur." So in Acts ix. 5, the Lord says to Saul, " It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks ;" i. e. to resist a superior power which has you under its control. 

Narrdtur et prisci Gatbnis Scepe mero caluisse virtus. Hob. — " It is said that the virtues even of old Cato were often warmed by wine." Said in allusion to the rigid Cato, the Censor. 

Nascentes morimur, finisque ab orlgme pendct. Ma NIL. — " We are born to die, and our end is the necessary con- 
sequence of our birth." 

Kasclmur poetce,Jlmus ordtdres. Cic. — " We are born poets, we become orators." Poetical genius is a gift, but oratory may be acquired by education and perseverance. Witness the instance of Cicero, who in vain tried to become a poet, and of Demosthenes, who by perseverance became the greatest of orators. See Porta nascitur, Ac. 

Ndtio comceda est. Jut. — " The nation is a company of players." 

Xatis in ustim Icetitiee scyphis Pugndre Thracum est ; toltite barburum  Morem. Hob. — " To quarrel over your cups, which were made to promote good fellowship, is like the Thracians : away with a nabit so barbarous." The battles of the Centaurs and Lapitha?, the near neighbours of the Thracians, commencea in a drunken brawl. 

Natos adfliimina primum Di-ftrimus, sarvoque gelu durdmus et undis, Viko. 
— " Our infants, as soon as born, we convey to the rivers, and harden them in the freezing ice and waves." 

Natiira bedtis Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cogndvrrit uti. Claud. — " Nature has given unto all to be happy, if each did but know how to make a proper use of her gifts." The same objects and opportunities may be blessings or curses to us, according as they are u^sd. 

Natiira dedit usuram vitce tanquam peciinice nulld prcestitiltd die. Cic. — " Nature has bestowed life on us, at interest, like money, no day being fixed for its recall." 

Katii.rd ipsa valere, et mentis v'trtbus excitdri, et quasi quodain  divino spmtu affldri. Cic. — " To be endowed with strength by nature, to be impelled by the powers of the mind, and to be inspired by a certain divine spirit as it were." A recital of the endowments of true genius. 

Natiira naturans — natiira naturdta. — " Nature formative — nature formed." The two ultimate principles of the Dualistic Philosophy are technically so called. 

Natiira non dat virtfitem ; nascimur quidem ad hoc, %ed sim hoe. Cic. — " Nature does not bestow virtue ; we are born indeed to it, but without it." 

Natfira ! quam te colimus mvlti quoque. Sen. — " nature ! how much do we worship thee, however unwilling ! " 

Natura tenacisswii sumus eorum quae pueri perciplmus , ut sapor, quo nova vasa imbuuntur, durat. Sen. — " We are naturally most tenacious of those impressions which we receive in childhood, just as a flavour remains in those vessels with which they were imbued when new." 

Naturalem quamdam voluptdtem habent lusus jocusque ; at eorum frequens usus omne dnimis pondus, omnemque vim eripit. Sen. — " There is a certain delight in pleasantry and jesting; but a too frequent use of them deprives the mind of all weight and vigour." 

Naturam expellas fared, tamen usque recurret. Hor. — " Though you should check Nature by force, she will still resume her sway." 

Naufragium rerum est mulier maleflda marito. — " A faithless 
wife is the shipwreck of her husband's fortunes." These 
words were quoted by William the Conqueror to his wife 
Matilda, on finding that she encouraged his son Robert in 
his rebellious designs. 

Nauseanti stomacho effluunt omnia. — " Everything is thrown 
off from a sick stomach." 

Ndvibus atque 

Quadrlgis petimus bene vlvere. Hor. 

— " With the help of ships and chariots we endeavour to 
make ourselves happy." By moving from place to place. 

Ne ad aures quidem scalpendas otium est. JProv. — " He has 
not time even to scratch his ears." 

Ne JEsbpum quidem trivit. Prov. — " He has not so much 
as thumbed iEsop." Said of a person extremely illiterate ; 
the Eables of iEsop being among the ancients an elementary 
school book. 

—Ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito. Virg. — " Tield 
not to misfortunes, but meet them with still greater firm- 
ness." The first three words are the motto of the Earl of 
Albemarle. 

Ne cuivis dextram injeceris. Prov. — " Don't give your right 
hand to every one." Use discrimination in the selection 
of vour friends. 



248 NE. 

Ne depugnes in alii-no negutio. Prov. — " Fight not in an* 
other person's concerns." 

Ne exeat regno. Law Term. — " Let him not leave the king- 
dom." A writ issued by the courts of Equity to prevent a 
person from leaving the kingdom without the royal licence. 

Ne glddium tollas, mtilier. Prov. — " Woman*, do not wield 
the sword." Persons should not wield "edged tools," 
which they know not how to use. 

Ne Hercules quidem contra duos. Aul. Gel. — "Not Her- 
cules even could struggle against two." 

Ne intelligis, do-mine f "Don't you understand, good sir?" 
See Love's Labour's Lost, Act V. sc. 1. 

Ne Jupiter quidem omnibus placet. Prov. — " Not Jupiter 
himself can please everybody." 

Ne mente quidem recte uti possiimus, multo cibo et poli^u- 
completi. Cic. — " We cannot use the mind aright when 
filled with much food and drink." 

Ne mihi contingant qua volo, sed qua sunt utilia. — "Let 
those things nappen to me, not which I most wish, but 
which are most for my good." 

Ne negligas amicitia consuetudinem, aut violes Jura ejusdem. 
— " You must not omit the usages of friendship, or violate 
the rights thereof." 

Ne non procumbat honeste, 

Extrima h&c etiam cura cadentis erat. Ovid. 
— " That she might fall in no unseemly manner — this was 
her care even as she died." Said of Lucretiawhen about 
to stab herself. v 

Ne plus ultra. — " No farther." " This is my ne plus ultra" — 
much the same as This is my ultimatum, (or, as the news- 
papers have it at the present day, my ultimatissimum,)— 
"beyond this I will not go." 

Ne prcesentem aquam effundas, priusquam aliam sis adeptus. 
Prov. — " Do not throw away the water you have, until 
you have got more." Do not throw away a present advan- 
tage for a problematical one. 

Ne prius antidutum quam venenum. Prov. — " Don't take 
the antidote before the poison." Do not exculpate your' 
self before you are accused. 

Ne, pueri, ne tanta animis assuescite bella ; 

Neu patriae vdlidas in viscera vertite v~res. Yuo 



NE. 249 

— "Do not, my sons, accustom youi minds to such cruel 
wars, nor turn your mighty strength against the vitals of 
your country." 

Ne putro gladium. JProv. — "Do not give a child a sword." 
Let every person act in his proper sphere of life. 

Ne, pulvis et cinis, superbe te geras, 
Omnipotentis ne fulmlna feras. 

— " Dust and ashes, be not elate with pride, lest the light- 
nings of the Omnipotent should reach thee." The com- 
menting lines of a Sequence used by the Romish Church. 

Ne qua nieis esto dietis mora Vieg. — " Let there be no 

delay in the execution of my injunctions." 

Ne quid abjecte, ne quid ttnvide facias. Cic. — " Do nothing 
meanly, nothing timidly." 

Ne quid detrimenti respublica capiat. — " That the republic 
shall receive no detriment." The injunction given at 
ancient Rome to the Dictator, when invested with the 
supreme authority. 

Ne quid falsi dicere audeat, ne quid veri non audeat. Cic. — 
" Let him not dare to say anything that is false, nor let 
him fear to say what is true." Advice given to an his- 
torian. 

Ne quid nimis. Tee. — " Not too much of anything." Dc 
nothing to excess. See Id arbitror, &c. 

Ne scu.t1.cd dignum horribili seder e flag ello. Hoe. — " Do not 
punish with an unmerciful scourge that which is only de- 
serving of the whip." The censure of the satirist, as well as 
of every one that reproves, should be proportionate tc 
the fault. 

Ne sibi deesset in his angustiis. Cic. — "Lest, in circum- 
stances of such great difficulty, he should be found want- 
ing to himself." 

Ne sus Minervam. Prov. — "A pig must not talk to Mi- 
nerva." Ignorant persons must not censure those wisei 
than themselves. 

Ne sutor ultra crepidam. — " Let not the shoemaker go be- 
yond his last." "Words addressed by Apelles to a shoe- 
maker, who pointed out errors in a slipper painted in one r»: 
his pictures ; but when he was proceeding to criticise othei 
parts of the painting, he was met by the artist with this 
rebuke. 



250 KB— NEC. 

Ne te longis ambdglbus ultra 

Quam satis est morer. Hob. 

— " That I may not, by a long circumlocution, delay you 

longer than ia necessary." 
Ne tentes, aut perfice. Prov. — " Attempt not, or achieve." 
Ne verba pro farlnd. JProv. — " Don't give me words for 

meal." Similar to our expression, " Sweet words butter nc 

parsneps." 
Nee bellua tt'trior ulla est, 

Quam servi rabies in libera terga furentis. Claud. 

— " No monster is there more baneful, than the fury of a 

slave wreaking his vengeance on the backs of freemen." 
Nee caput nee pedes. Cic. — "Neither head nor feet;" or, 

as we say, " Neither head nor tail." 
Nee cibus ipse juvat morsu frauddtus act'ti. Mart. — " N i it 

food itself is palatable when deprived of the relish given 

by vinegar." 
Nee citb eredldPris ; quantum citb cri-dhre Imdat, 

Exemplum vobis, non leve, Procris erit. Ovid. 

— "Be not too ready to believe; the fate of Procris will 

be no slight example to you how disastrous it is to believe 

things readily." See Ovid's Met. b. vii. 1. 394, et seq. 
Nee cui de te plusquam tibi credos. Prov. — " Give no man 

more credit than yourself about yourself." Do not 

acquiesce in either praises or censures pronounced on 

you, which you know to be undeserved. 
Nee deus inter sit, nisi dignus \vind1ce nodus. IIor. — "Nor 

let a god interfere, unless there be a difficulty worthy of a 

god's assistance." Advice to dramatic writers, not to 

introduce personages too exalted, except on occasions of the 

highest importance. 
Nee domo dommus, sed domino domus honestanda est. Cic— 

" The master ought not to be honoured by the houee, but 

the house by the master." 
Nee facile invmias multis in millibus unum ; 

Virtiitempretium qui putet esse sui. Ovid. 

— "Among many thousands you would not easily find 

one who believes that virtue is its own reward." 
ftec fuge colloquium; nee sit tibi jdnua clausa. Ovid. — 

" Fly not from conversation ; and let not aout door bo 

shut." J 



NEC. 251 

Nee imbellem feroces 

Progenerant aquttce columbam. Hob. 

— " Nor do ferocious eagles beget the unwarlike dove." 

Nee levis, ingmuas pectus coluisse per artes, 

Cura sit ; et linguas edldicisse duas. Ovid. 

— " And be it no light care to cultivate the mind with the 
liberal arts, and to learn thoroughly the two languages." 
The Latin and the Greek. 

Nee longum tempus, et ingens 

Exiit ad caelum ramis felicihus arbos, 

Mirdturque novas frondes, et non sua poma. Yibg. 

— " In no long time a huge tree shoots up to heaven with 

verdant boughs, and admires its new leaves, and fruits not 

its own." Said of the results of grafting trees. 

Nee loquor hcec, quia sit major prudentia nobis ; 
Sed sim, quam medico, notior ipse mihi. Ovid. 
— " And I say this, not because I have any greater fore- 
sight, but because I am better known to myself than to a 
physician." 

Nee lusisse pudet, sed non incldPre ludum. Hoe. — " It is no 
disgrace to have been gay, but it is, not to have renounced 
those gaieties." The shame does not lie in having joined 
in gaieties, but in not having quitted them at a proper 
season. A man must not be always " sowing his wild 
oats." 

Nee magis sine illo nos esse felices, quam ille sine nobis potuit. 
Pliny's Panegyric on Trajan. — " No more could we live 
happily without him, than he could without us." 

Nee me pudet, ut istos,fateri nesclre quod nesciam. ClC— 
" Nor am I ashamed, like those men, to acknowledge that 
I do not know the things which I do not know." 

— —Nee meus audet 

Item tentdre pudor, quam vires ferre recusent. VlEG. 

— " Nor does my modesty presume to attempt a thing 

which my powers are unable to accomplish." 

Nee meus hie sermo est, sed quae prcecepit Ofellus. Hoe. — 
" Nor is this my language, but a precept which Ofellus 
has given." 

Nee mihi dlcere promptum, 

NecfdcPre est isti. Ovtd. 

— " Neither does my talent lie in talking, nor his in act- 



252 NEC. 

ing." The words of Ajax when pleading against Ulysses 
for the arms of Achilles. 

Nee minimum refert, intacta rosaria primus, 
An sera carpas pcene relicta manu. Ovid. 

— " Nor does it make a slight difference only, whether 
you cull from roseheds hefore untouched, or whether, with 
a late hand, when there are hardly any roses left." 

Nee minor est virtus, quam guar ere, part a tutri : 

Casus inest illic ; hie er it art is opus. Ovid. 

— " "lis no less merit to keep what you have got, than 
to gain it. In the one there is some chance ; the other 
will he a work of art." 

Nee mirum, quod div'tna natura dedit agros, ars liumtina cedifi- 
cdvit urbes. Vaebo. — "Nor is it wonderful, as divine 
nature has given us the country, and human art has built 
the cities." Similar to the line of Cowper, 
" God made the country, and man made the town." 

Nee mora, nee requies. Vieo. — " Neither rest nor ces- 
sation." No intermission is allowed. 

Nee morti esse locum. Vibg. — " Nor is there scope for 

death." Virgil says, that after their dissolution on earth, 
all things return to God, and that death has no further 
power over them. 

Necnon et ajjes exdnuna condunt 
Corticibusque cavis vitiosaque ilicis alveo. Vibg. 
— " Bees also conceal their swarms in the hollow bark and 
in the trunk of a decayed holm oak." 

Nee nos obn'tti contra, nee tenJere tantum 

Sufficimus ; superat quoniam Fortuna, sequamur, 

Quoque vocat vertdmus iter. VlEG. 

— " We are neither able to make head against (the storm), 
nor even to withstand it ; since Fortune overpowers us, let 
us follow her, and turn our course whither she invites us." 
The words of iEneas to his followers. 

Nee placidam membris dat cura quietem. VlEG. — " Nor 
does care allow placid quiet to the wearied limbs." 

Nee pluribus impar. — " No unequal match for many." The 
motto assumed by Louis XIV. when he formed his pro- 
ject for the subjugation for Europe. 

Nee pluteum ccedit, nee demorsos sapit ungues. Pees. — 
" It neither thumps away at the desk, nor savours of 



NEC. 253 

nails gnawed to the quick " Said of poor spiritless 
poetry. 

Nee, quae prceteriit, iterum revocdbltur unda ; 

Nee, quae praeteriit hora redlre potest. Ovid. 

— " Neither shall the wave, which has passed by, ever be 
recalled ; nor can the hour which has passed ever re- 
turn." 

Nee quare et unde — quid habeat tantum rogant. — " People 
ask not how and whence, but only what a man possesses." 

Nee quicquam ad nostras pervenit acerbius aures. Ovid. — 
" Nothing more distressing has come to my ears." 

Nee satis est pulchra esse poemata, dulcia sunto. Hoe. — " It 
is not enough that poems be beautiful ; let them be pleas- 
ing also." 

Nee scire fas est omnia. Hoe. — " Nor is it allowed us tc 
know all things." 

Nee semper feriet quodcunque mindbitur arcus. Hoe. — 
" Nor will the arrow always hit the object aimed at." 

Nee servum meliorem ullum, nee deteriorem donunum fuisse. 
Sueton. — " There never was a better servant or a worse 
master." Said of the emperor Caligula. 

Nee, si me subito vldeas, aqnoscere possis. Ovid. — " Nor 
could you recognise me, if you were to see me on a 
sudden." 

Nee si non obstdtur propterea etiam permittitur. ClC. — 
"Though an act is not prohibited, it does not there- 
fore follow that it is permitted." Moral duties go beyond 
the mere letter of the law. 

Nee sibi ceendrum quivis temere arroget artem, 
Non prius exactd tenui ratione saporum. Hoe. 
— " Let no man rashly arrogate to himself a knowledge of 
the art of catering, if he has not previously acquired an in- 
timate knowledge of the delicate distinctions of flavours." 

Nee sibi, sed toti genitum se credere mundo. Ltjcan. — " To 
believe that he was born not for himself alone, but for the 
whole world." The principle acted upon by the bene- 
factors of mankind. 

Nee sum adeo informis, nuper me in littore vidi. Vieg. — 
" Nor am I so very ugly, I lately viewed myself on the 
shore." Self-commendation. 

Nee twmen ignorat, quid distent cera lupinis. Hob. — " Nor 



254 NEC. 

is he ignorant of the vast differeme between money and 
lupines." He can distinguish between the worthy and 
the worthless. Lupines were used as counters among the 
Romans, and to represent money on the stage. 

Nee tamen in dando mensilram deserit; immo, 
Singula descritit certo moder •amine finis. 
— " Nor yet in giving does he go beyond all bounds ; nay, 
rather, to each he assigns a portion fixed and 'definite." 

Nee tamen indignum est, quod vobis cura placendi, 

Cum comptos habeant saicula nostra viros. Ovid. 

— " And yet it is not unbecoming for you to have- a cafe 
to please, since our age produces men of taste." Advk-e 
to the ladies. 

Nee tibi quid liceat, sed quia Ifecisse decebit 

Occurrat ; mentemque dornet respectus lionesti. Claud. 
— " And let it not be the subject of your thoughts what 
you may do, but what you ought to do ; let a regard for 
what is honourable ever govern your mind." 

Nee vagus in laxd pes tibi pelle natet. Ovin. — " And do not 
let your foot wallop about in your shoe down at heel." 

Nee Veneris pharPtris macer est, aut lampade fervet : 
Inde faces ardent, vPniunt a dote sagitta. Jut. 

— " It is not from Venus' quiver that he grows thin, or 
with her torch that he burns ; it is from this that his fires 
are fed, from her dowry the arrows come." Said of a 
fortune-hunter. 

Nee verbum verbo curabis reddPrefidus 

Interpres. Hoe. 

— " Nor, even if a faithful translator, should you make it 
your care to render the original word for word." The 
meaning of the original might be lost thereby. 

Nee vldisse semel satis est,juvat usque mordri, 

JEt conferre gradum, et veniendi discere causas. Virg. 
— " Nor is it enough to have merely seen him ; they are 
delighted to prolong the interview, and to approach him, 
and to learn the cause of his coming." The ghosts of the 
departed Trojans thronging around vEneas, when he visits 
the infernal regions. 

Nee vixit male qui natus moriensque fefellit. Hon. — " Nor 
has he lived to no purpose, who, from his birth to his 
death, has Lived in retirement." 



NEC— NEGk 255 

Nee vos, turbafere censu frauddta, magistri 

Spern7te : disclpiilos attrdhit ilia novos. Ovid. 
— " Neither do you, schoolmasters, a set too often cheated 
of your pay, despise her; 'tis she that hrings you new 
pupils." Minerva, the goddess of wisdom, is alluded to. 

• Nee vultu destrue dicta tuo. Ovid. — " And do not undo 

your sayings with your looks." 

Necesse est cum insanienUbus furPre, nisi solus relinqueris. 
Petbon. Akb. — " It is necessary to be mad with the in- 
sane, if you would not be left alone." It is as well to 
appear to conform to the prejudices of the day. 

Necesse est eum qui velit peccdre dliquando primum delinquere. 
Cic. — " It is a matter of course that he who would sin 
must first fail in his duty." See Nemo repente, &c. 

Necesse est facere sumptum, qui qucerit lucrum. Plaut. — 
" It is necessary for him who looks for gain, to incur some 
expense." " Nothing venture, nothing win." 

Necesse est in, immensum exeat cupiditas quce naturdlem mO' 
dum transiliit. Sen. — " Avarice, when it has once passed 
the proper limits, of necessity knows no bounds." 

Necesse est ut multos tlmeat, quern multi timent. Stk. — 
"He whom many fear, must of necessity fear many." 
The condition of the tyrant. See Multos timere, &c, and 
Multis terribilis, &c. 

Necessltas est lex temporis et loci. Law Max. — " Necessity is 
the law of time and place." 

Necessltas non liabet legem. Law Max. — " Necessity knows 
no law." In a sinking ship, for instance, the laws of life 
and property are but little regarded. 

Necessitudtnis et libertdtis infiriita est cestimdtio. Law Max. — 
" Necessity and liberty should receive the very greatest 
consideration." 

N~efas nocere vel malo fratri puta. Sen. — " Consider it a 
crime to do an injury to a bad brother even." Similar 
to the Scripture precept, by which we are commanded to 
return good for evil. 

Negat quis ? Nego. Ait ? Aio. Postremo impetrdvi egomet 
mihi omnia assentdri. Cic. — " Does any one deny a thing ? 
Then I deny it. Does he affirm ? Then I affirm. In fine, 
I have prevailed upon myself to agree to everything." 



256 NEO— NEM. 

Neglecta solent incendia snmPre vires. II oh. — " Firo 

neglected is wont to gain strength." 
NegligPre quid de se quisque sentiat, non solum arrogantis is/, 

sed omnlno dissohlti. Cic. — "To be careless of u hat any 

one may think of him, is not only the conduct of an arro- 
gant man, but of one utterly abandoned." 
Negotiispar. — " Equal to business." Able to manage atl'airs. 
Nem. con. Abbreviation of nfniine contradicente. — " No one 

contradicting " any question proposed. 
Nem. diss. Abbreviation of nfmme dissentiente. — " No one 

disagreeing" with a proposition made. 
NPnfinem id HgPre, ut ex altPrius prcedPtur inscitid. Cic. — 

" No man should so act as to take advantage of another 

man's ignorance." 
Nhnlnem tibi adjvngas am'tcum priusquam explordverit am 

prioribus anucis sit ttsus. — " Make no man your friend be- 
fore you have ascertained how he has behaved towards his 

former friends." 
Ntniini dixeris, quae nolis rflerri. Prov. — " Tell no one that 

which you do not wish repeated again." 
Nerriini jidas, nisi cum quo prius medium salis abtumpt 

Prov. — " Trust no man till you have eaten a bushel of salt 

with him." 
Nemo allegans suam turpitvdlnem audiendus est. Law Max.— 

" No man bearing testimony of his own baseness ought to 

be heard." / 

Nemo an bonus, an dives omnes quarimus. Prov. — " No 

one asks whether a man is good ; we all ask whether he 

is rich." 
Nemo bene impPrat nisi qui paruPrit impPrio. Prov. — " No 

man is fully able to command, unless he has first learned 

to obey." 
Nemo dat quod non habet. Law Max. — " No man gives that 

which he does not possess." 
Nemo debet bis puniri pro uno delicto. Coke. — " No man 

ought to be punished twice for one oiFence." 
Nemo dexterius fortiind sit usus. — " No man has more j udi- 

ciously employed his good fortune." 
Nemo doctus mutdtionem consilii inconstantiam dixit esse. ClC. 

— " No well-instructed man has called a change of opinion 



NEM 257 

inconstancy." Acknowledgment of error is a duty, r.pon 
the observance of which our improvement depends. 

Nemo errat uni sibi, sed dementiam spargit in proximos. Sen 
— " No man commits error for himself alone, but scat- 
ters his folly among all around him." Error is doubly in- 
jurious ; first in itself, and then by example. 

Nemo est ab omni parte bedtus. — " No man is happy in every 
respect." See Nihil est, &c. 

Nemo est hoeres viventis. Law Max. — " No man is the heir 
of one who is alive." He is only an " heir apparent." 
See LLceredem Deus, &c. 

Nemo in sese tentat descendtre ? Nemo ! Pees. — " Does 

no one attempt to explore himself? No one!" Instead 
of looking into the faults of others, we should examine 
our own hearts. 

Nemo ire quenquam publico. proMbet via. Plaut. — " No one 
forbids another to go along the highway." No one is 
likely to interfere with you so long as you keep the beaten 
path. 

Nemo ita pauper vivit, quam pauper naius est. Ste. — " No 
man ever lived so poor as he was born." 

Nemo Iceditur nisi a, seipso. Prov. — " No man is hurt but by 
himself." 

Nemo malusfelix, mmlme corruptor. • Jut. — " No wicked 
man can be happy, least of all one who corrupts others." 

Nemo me impune lacessit. — " No one provokes me with im- 
punity." The motto of the Order of the Thistle, a plant 
which is protected by its prickles. 

Nemo militans Deo implicetur seculdrtbus negotiis. Coke. — 
" No one in the service of God should be involved in 
secular affairs." 

Nemo mortdlium omnibus horis sapit. Pliny, the Lllder.—- 
" No man is wise at all times." 

Nemo plus juris in dlium transferre potest quam ipse habet. 
Law Max. — " No man can transfer to another a right or 
title greater than he himself possesses." 

Nemo potest nudo vestimenta detrahere. Prov. — " No man 
can strip a naked man of his garment." Like our saying, 
" Tou cannot get blood out of a stone." 

Nemo prudens punit quia peecdtum est, sed ne peccetur. Sen. 
— "No man of prudence punishes because a fault has 



258 KEM— NEQ. 

been committed, but that it may not be committed." If 
this were not the object of punishment, it would degener- 
ate into revenge. 

Nemo punidtur pro alieno delicto. Law Max. — " Let no man 
be punished lor the fault of another." 

Nemo qui sues confldit, aWrius virtuti invidet. Cio. — " No 
man who confides in his own virtue, envies that of an- 
other." 

Nemo repente fuit turpissimus Juv. — " No man era 

became extremely wicked all at once." Men sink into 
the depths of vice step by step. 

Nemo sic impar sibi. — " No man was ever so unequal to him- 
self." See Nil fuit, &v. 

Nemo solus satis sapit. Plaut. — " No man is sufficiently 
wise of himself." 

Nemo sud sorte contentus. — " No one is contented with his 
own lot." 

Nemo tarn divos habuit faventes, 

Crasttnum ut possit sibi polliciri. Sen. 

— " No man was ever so favoured by the gods as to be 

able to promise himself a morrow." 

Nemo tenetur ad impossible. Law Max. — " No one is bound 
to do that which is impossible." 

Nemo tenetur seipsum accusdre. Law Max. — " No one is 
bound to accuse himself." 

Nemo vir magnus, sine alt quo affldtu divino, unquam fuit. CiC. 
— " No man was ever great without some portion of Di- 
vine inspiration." 

Neptunum, procul a terra, spectdre furentem. — " From the 
land to view the ocean raging afar." 

Nequam homtnis ego parvipendo grdtiam. Plaut. — " I set 
little value on the esteem of a worthless man." 

Nequam Mud verbum est, Bene vult, nisi qui benefacit. Plaut. 
— " That expression, * he wishes well,' is worthless unless a 
person does well besides." 

Nequaquam satis in re una consumtre curam. Hoh. — " It is 
by no means enough to devote our care exclusively to 
one object." 
Neque cacum ducem, neque amentem consultbrem. — " [Select] 
neither a blind guide nor a silly adviser." A sentiment 
from Aristophanes. 



NEQ. 259 

Neque cuiquam tarn clarum ingPnium est, ut possit emergPre 
nisi Mi materia, occasio, fautor etiam commenddtorque con- 
tingat. Pliny the Younger. — " No man possesses a genius 
so commanding, as to be able to rise in tbe world, unless 
tbese means are afforded him : — opportunity, and a friend 
to promote his advancement." 

Neque culpa neque lauda teipsum. — " Neither blame nor 
praise yourself." Avoid egotism, and pretend not to be 
either better or worse than you are. 

Neque enim concludPre versum 

DixPris esse satis : neque, si quis scribat, uti nos, f 
Sermoni propiora, putes liunc esse poetam. Hor 

— " Por you must not deem it enough to tag a verse ; nor if 
any person, like me, writes in a style more nearly resem- 
bling conversation, must you esteem him to be a poet." 

Neque enim lex cequior ulla, 

Quam necis artifices arte perlre sud. Ovid. 

— " For there is no law more just than that the contrivers 

of death should perish by their own contrivances." 

Neque enim quies gentium sine armis, neque arma sine sti- 
pendiis, neque stipendia sine tributis. Tacit. — " The re- 
pose of nations cannot be insured without arms, arms 
without pay, nor pay without taxes." An armed peace is 
the best guarantee against war. 

Neque extra necessitates belli prcecipuwm odium gero. — " Be- 
yond that necessitated by war, I feel no particular resent- 
ment." 

Neque femtna, amissd pudicitid, alia abnuerit. Tacit. — 
" When a woman has once lost her chastity, she will deny 
nothing." She will most probably be induced by circum- 
stances to submit to any degradation. 

Neque mala vel bona quce vulgus putet. Tacit. — " Things 
are not to be pronounced either good or bad on public 
opinion." 

Neque mel, neque apes. Prov. — "No bees, no honey." 
" Every rose has its thorns." 

Neque opinibne sed natiira constitutum est jus. ClC — " Not 
in opinion but in nature is law founded." 

Neque semper arcum 
Tendit Apollo. Hor. 
— " Nor is Apollo always bending his bow." 
s 2 



2G0 NEQ— NES. 

NPqueo monstrdre, et sentio iantum. Jl'Y. — "I cannot 

describe it, I only feel it." 

Nequicquam Deus abscldit 
Prudens ocedno dissocidVtli 
Terras, si tamen implee 

Non tangenda rates translliunt vada. Hok. 
— " In vain has God in his wisdom divided the countries 
of the earth by the separating ocean, if nevertheless pro- 
fane barks bound over the forbidden waters." 

Nequicquam exorndta est bene, si mordta est male, 

Pulchrum orndtum turpes mores pejus cceno collinunt. 

Plaut. 
— " It is in vain that a woman is well dressed, if she is 
ill conducted; misconduct soils a fine dress worsr than 
dirt." 

Nequicquam populo blbulas dondvPris aures ; 

JRespue quod non es. Pees. 

— " You cannot possibly give the people ears that will 
drink in everything: aim not at that for which you are 
not made." You cannot long impose even on the credu- 
lity of the public. 

Nequicquam sapit qui sibi non sapit. JProv. — " lie is wise to 
no purpose who is not wise for himself." 

Nequiss!mi homlnis est prodPre amlcum. — " It is the part of 
the most abandoned of men to betray his friend." 

Nequitiam vlnosa tuam convlvla narrant. Ovid. — " Your 
drunken banquets bespeak your debauchery." 

Nervi belli pecunia infinlta. Cic. — " Endless money is the 
very sinews of war." Both Bacon and Machiavelli ques- 
tion the truth of this saying. 

Ncrvis dlienis mobile lignum. — " A wooden puppet moved by 
strings in the hands of others." Said with reference to 
those who allow themselves to be made the tools of others. 

Nervis omnibus. Prov. — " Straining every nerve." 

Nescia mens homtnumfati sortisque futures, 

Et servdre modum rebus subldta secundis ! VlEG. 
— " How blind is the mind of men to fate and future 
events, how unwilling to practise moderation, when elated 
with prosperity !" 

Nescio qua natdle solum dula'dine eunctos 

Ducit, et immi-mores non sinit esse sui. OviD. 



NES—NEU. 261 

— " The land of our birth allures us by an unaccountable 
attraction, and permits us not to be forgetful of it." 

Nescio qua prceter sotitum dulcedine Iceti. Virg. — " By some 
inconceivable charm animated beyond their wont." 

Nescio quis tenPros ociilus mihi fascinat agnos. Virg. — " 1 
know not what evil eye has bewitched my tender lambs." 
Said in reference to the notion among the ancients, that 
evil resulted from the glance of the envious eye. 

Nescio quomodo inhceret in menttbus quasi sceculorum augurium 
futurbrum ; idque in maxima ingPniis, altissimisque ariimis, 
et existit maxime et appnret facilVlme. ClC. — " There is, 
I know not how, inherent in the minds of men, a certain 
presage as it were of a future state ; and this chiefly ex- 
ists and appears the most manifest, in those of the greatest 
genius and of the most exalted mind." 

Nesctre quid ante a quam natus sis accidPrit, id est semper esse 
puPrum ; quid enim est a?fas hdmrnis, nisi memoria rerum 
nostrarum cum supPriorum cetdte contexPrit ? Cic. — " To be 
unacquainted with what has taken place before you were 
born, is to be always a child ; for what is human life, un- 
less memory is able to compare the events of our own 
times with those of by-gone ages ?" 

Nescis quid serus vesper vehat. Prov. — " You know not 
what night-fall may bring." 

Jtfescis tu quam meticidosa res sit ire ad judicem. Plaut. — 
"You little know what a ticklish thing it is to go to 
law." 

Nescit plebs jejuna timere. Prov. — " A starving populace 
knows no fear." 

Nescit vox missa reverti. Hob. — " The word which has 
been once uttered, can never be recalled." Hence the mis- 
chief that may result from an unguarded expression or 
the disclosure of a secret. 

Neufluitem dPibice spe pendulus horce. Hon. — " That I 

may not fluctuate in the hope dependent on each uncertain 
hour." The blessings of a competency. 

Neuf/quam qfflcium llbPri esse hommis puto, 

Cum is nihil promPr eat ,postuldre id grdtiee apponi sibi. Ter. 
— " I do not think it the part of a man of a liberal 
mmd to ask that a thing should be granted him when he 
has done nothing to deserve it." 



262 NI— NIH. 

— m 

JPosces ante diem librum cum I limine, si non 
Intendes antmum stiidiis et rebus honestis, 
Invidid vel amove vigil torquebPre. Hob. 

— " Unless before day you call for your book with a -ight, 
unless you occupy your mind with study and becoming 
pursuits, you will, when waking, be tortured by envy or 
by love." By idleness the passions are let loose, and mis- 
chief is a probable result. 

Ni vis boni 
In ipsd inesset formd, hcecformam extinguPrent. Tee. 
— "Had there not been great force of beauty in her very 
form, these things must have extinguished it." Her neg- 
lected dress and disheveled hair. 

Nihil a Deo vacat : opus suum ipse implet. Sen. — " Nothing 
is void of God : He himself falls all his works." The doc- 
trine of Pantheism. 

Nihil ad versum. — " Not corresponding to the words," 
meaning, "not to the purpose." This adage is supposed 
to have had reference to the representations by gesticula- 
tion of the sense of the part recited. Hence, when the 
actor failed to represent the sense conveyed by the line, 
the prompter used this expression. 

Nihil agendo hdmines male figPre discunt. — " By doing no- 
thing, men learn to do ill." 

Nihil agit qui diffidentem verbis soldtur suis ; 

Is est amicus qui in re diibid re juvat, ubi re est opus. 

Plaut. 
— " He does nothing who consoles a desponding man with 
words ; he is a true friend, who, under doubtful circum- 
stances, aids in deed when deeds are necessary." 

Nihil aliud necessdrium, ut sis miser, quam ut te misPrum 
credos. — "Nothing is wanting to make you wretched but 
to fancy yourself so." 

Nihil altum, nihil magnlflcum ac div'inum suscipere possunt, 
qui sua* omnes cogitdtiones abjecerunt in rem tarn humilem 
atque abjectam. Cic. — " They can attempt nothing ele- 
vated, nothing noble and divine, who have expended all 
their thoughts upon a thing so low and abject." 

Nihil credam et omnia cavebo. — " I will trust to nothing, and 
be on my guard against everything." 



NIH. 263 

Nihil differt utrum cegrum in ligneo lecto an in aureo colloces : 

quocumque ilium transtiileris, morbum suum secum trans* 
fert. Sen. — " It matters not whether you place the sick 

man on a wooden bed, or on one of gold; wherever you 

lay him, he carries his disease along with him." 
Nihil difficile est Nature, ubi adjinem 

Sui properat Momentofit cinis, diu silva. Sen. 

— " Nothing is difficult to Nature, when she is pursuing 

her end. A wood is long in making, ashes are made in 

an instant." Said in reference to the final destruction of 

the earth by fire. See Esse quoque, &c. 
Nihil doli subesse credens. Corn. Nep. — " Suspecting no 

deceit." 
Nihil eripit fortuna nisi quod et dedit. Stb. — " Fortune 

takes nothing away hut what she has given." 
Nihil est ab omni 

Parte beatum. Hor. 

— " There is nothing that is blessed in every respect." 

There is a dark side to every picture. 
Nihil est dliud magnum, quam multa minuta. JProv. — " That 

which is great is nothing but many littles." " Many 

littles make a mickle." 
Nihil est aptius ad delectatibnem lectoris, quam temporum va- 

rietdtes, fortunaeque vicissitudines. Cic. — " Nothing is 

better suited for the entertainment of a reader, than the 

varying features of times, and the vicissitudes of fortune." 

It is the varieties and contrasts of history that make 

" truth stranger than fiction." 
Nihil est furdcius illo : 

Nonfuit Autolyci tarn picedta manus. Mart. 

— " There is nothing in the world more pilfering than he ; 

not even the hand of Autolycus was so gluey (filching) 

as his." 
Nihil est in vita rnagnopere expetendum nisi laus et honestas. 

Cic. — " There is nothing in life so earnestly to be sought 

as character and probity." 
Nihil est miserius, quam animus hominis conscius. Pla.ut. — » 

" There is nothing more wretched than the mind of a man 

with a guilty conscience." 
Nihil est 

Quin male narrando possit depravdrier. Ter. — " There is 

110 story but what may be made worse by being badly told." 



2G1 NIB. 

NiMH est quod credere de se 

Non possit. .Tirv. 

— " There is nothing that he caunot believe about him- 
self." 

Nihil est quod non expugnet perttnax fipera, et intent a ac dill- 
gens cura. Skn. — " There is nothing which persevering 
industry may not overcome, with continued and diligent 
care." 

Nihil est sdnitdti multo vino nocentius. — " There is nothing 
more prejudicial to health than much wine." 

Nihil est tarn utile quod in transitu prosit. Sen. — " Nothing 
is so useful that it can be profitable from only a hasty 
perusal." No lasting benefit can be derived from careless 
or hasty studies. 

Nihil est tarn vulucre quam mdledictum, nihil fiiciliu* emittffur, 
nihil cltius excipttur, nihil Idtius dissipdtur. Cic. — " No- 
thing is so swift in flight as slander, nothing more easily 
propagated, nothing more readily received, nothing more 
widely disseminated." 

Nihil turn commendat prater simuldtam versfdamque tris- 
dtiam. Cic. — " He has nothing to recommend him, ex- 
cept an assumed and deceitful seriousness." 

Nihil hie nisi carnitna desunt. VlEG. — " Nothing is 

wanting here but a song." 

Nihil homini atriico est opportdno amicius. Platjt. — " There 
is nothing more desirable to a man than a friend in 
need." 

Nihil honestum esse potest, quod justltid vacat. Cic. — " No- 
thing can be honest which is destitute of justice." 

Nihil largiundo gloriam adeptus est. Sall. — " He acquired 
glory by no bribery." He rose by his own merits. 

Nihil legebat quod non excerperet. Pliny the Younger. — " He 
read no work from which he did not cull something." Said 
of his uncle the Elder Pliny, author of the Historia Nattt- 
ralis. 

Nihil Lysice subt'dltdte cedit, nihil argiitiis et acumlne Hy- 
peridi. Cic. — " He yields not a jot to Lysias in subtlety, 
nor to Hyperides in acumen and sharpness of repartee.' ' 
Lysias was a celebrated orator of Syracuse, Hyperides of 
Athens. 

isilnl magis consentdneum est quam ut iisdem modis res dissol* 
vdtur auilus const itultur. Law Max. — " Nothing is more 



NIH. 2G5 

consistent with reason than that everything should he un- 
done by the same means by which it was done." A deed 
under seal, for instance, can only be varied by a deed 
under seal. 
Nihil potest rex nisi quod de jure potest. Law Max. — "The 
king can do nothing but what he is allowed to do by law." 
In a country, namely, which is governed on constitutional 
principles. 
Nihil pretio parco, amico dum opitulor. — " I spare no expense 

so long as I can serve my friend." 
Nihil prodest improbam mercem emere. JProv. — " There is no 

advantage in buying had wares." 
Hihil scire est vita jucundisslma. Prov. — " To know no- 
thing at all is the happiest life." So our old English pro- 
verb, " Children and fools have merry lives." 
Nihil scriptum miraculi causa. Tacit. — " There is nothing 
written here to excite wonder." Said of a plain unvarn- 
ished narrative. 
Nihil semper floret ; cetas succedit cetati. — " Nothing nourishes 

for ever ; age succeeds age." 
Nihil simul inventum est et perfectum. Coke. — " Nothing is 
invented and brought to perfection at the same moment.' ' 
Nihil sub sole novi. — " There is no new thing under the sun." 

Heel. i. 9. 
nihil tarn absurdum dici potest ut non diedtur a philosopho. 
Cic. — " There is nothing so absurd but what it may have 
been said by some philosopher." 
Nihil tarn difficile est, quin qucerendo investigdri possit. Tee. 
— " There is nothing so difficult, but what it may be found 
out by research." 
Nihil tamflrmum est, cui periculum non sit etiam ah invatido. 
Quint. Curt. — " There is nothing so secure, but what 
there may be danger from even the weakest." A mouse 
may put the finishing stroke to the ruin of a castle-wall. 
Nihil tarn firmum est, quod non expugndri pecunid possit. 
Cic. — " Nothing is so well fortified that it cannot be taken 
by money." 
Nihil turpius est quam gravis estate senex, qui nullum aliud 
habet argumentum, quo se probet diu vixisse, prceter eetdtem. 
Sen. — " There is nothing more despicable than an old man, 
who has no other proof to give of his having lived long 
than his age." 



2GG NIH— NIL. 

Nihil unquam peccdvit, nisi quod mortua est. — " She only did 
amiss in this, that she died." An epitaph on a virtuous 
wife, given by Camerarius as having been found near the 
Jews' Quarter at Home. 

Nihil unquam sic impar sibi. See Nilfuit, &c. 

Nihil videtur mundius. Tee. — " Nothing seems moro 

neat." 

Nihtli cdcio est. Plaut. — "Trusting is good for nought." 

Nil actum credens, dum quid superesset agendum. Ltjcan. — 
"Considering nothing done, whilst aught remained to be 
done." Said of Julius Caesar. The principle adopted by 
a man of energy and talent. 

Nil adeofortuna gravis miser dbXle fecit, 

Ut mlnuant nulla gaudia pace Malum. OviD. 

— "Misfortune has made no lot so wretched, but what 

a respite of the evil is productive of some delight." 

Nil admirdri prope est res una, Nurnici, 

Sotaque, qua possit fa cere et servdre bedtum. Hob. 
— " Never to lose one's self-possession is almost the one 
and only thing, Numicius, which can make and keep a 
man happy." 

Nil agit exemplum litem quod lite resolvit. Hoe. — " That 
illustration is of no use which extricates us from one diffi- 
culty by involving us in another." 

Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpd. Hoe. — See Hie 
murus, &c. 

Nil consuetildtne majus. Ovid. — " There is nothing 

more powerful than custom." 

Nil cupientium 

Nudus castra peto. Hoe. 

— " Naked I commit myself to the camp of those who de- 
sire nothing." 

Nil debet. Law Term. — " He owes nothing." The common 
plea in defending an action for debt. 

Nil desperandum. — " Nothing is to be despaired of." 

Nil desperandum Teucro duce, et auspice Teucro. Hob.— 
" We must despair of nothing, Teucer being our leader, 
and we under his command." 

Nil dicit. Law Term. — " He says nothing." When the 
defendant fails to put in his answer to the plaintiff's declar- 
ation, judgment is given against him, because he dees not 
say anything why it should not be 



NIL. 2G7 

JV5J dictufoedum visuque hcec limina tangat, 

Intra qua puer est. Jut. 

— " Let nothing unfit to be said or seen, enter those 
thresholds where youth inhabits." See Maxima debe- 
tur, &c. 

Nil dictum quod non dictum prius. Prov. — " Nothing can 
be said which bas not been said before." See Nihil sub, &c. 

Nil ego contulerim jucundo sanus amtco. Hoe. — " There is 
nothing which, in my senses, I should prefer to an agree- 
able friend." 

Nil erit ulterius quod nostris mbrtbus addat 
Posteritas ; eadem cupient facientque minor es : 

Omne in prcecipiti vitium stetit. Juv. 

— " There will be nothing left for posterity to add to our 
manners ; those who come after us will act as we do, and 
have the same desires : every vice has reached its cul- 
minating point." The complaint of the moralist in every 
age against the luxury and vice of his time. 

Nilferet ad Manes dlvUis umbra suos. Ovid. — " The ghost 
of the rich man will carry nothing to the shades below." 

Nilfuit unquam 

Sic impar sibi. Hoe. 

— " Never was there anything so unlike itself." The ex- 
treme of inconsistency. 

Nil habet infelix paupertas durius in se, 

Quam quod ridiculos homines facit. Juv. 

— " Unhappy poverty has nothing in it more galling, than 
that it exposes men to laughter." 

Nil habuit in tenementis. Law Term. — " He had no such 
tenement." The plea denying the title of the plaintiff in 
an action of debt by a lessor against a lessee without 
deed. 

Nil homini cerium est. Fieri quis posse putdret ? Ovid. — 
" There is nothing assured to mortals. Who could have 
thought that this would come to pass ?" 

Nil intra est oleam, nil extra est in nuce duri. Hob. — " [If 
such is not the case] then there is no kernel in the olive, 
no shell outside the nut." A person who will maintain 
that, will swear that black is white. 

Nil me officii unquam, 

Dltior hie, aut est quia doctior ; est locus uni 
Cuique suits. Hob. 



2G8 NIL. 

— " It nothing affects me that this man is more wealthy 
or more learned than I am ; every man has his own sta- 
tion." 

Nil mild das vivus, dicis post fata daturum ; 

Si non insdnis, scis, Maro, quid cupiam. Mart. 
— " You give me nothing during your life, you say yo.i 
will leave me something after your death ; if you are not 
a fool, Maro, you know what I wish for." The thoughts of 
the man who is waiting to slip " into dead men's shoes." 

Nil mild vobiscum est ; hac metis ardor erit. Ovid. — " I 
have nought to do with you ; she shall be my flame." 

Nil mortdtibus arduum est. Hon. — " Nothing is too arduous 
for mortals." "With patience and perseverance there is no 
difficulty in that which is not in itself impossible. 

Nil obstat. Co'is tibi pene vidire est 
Tit nudam, ne crure malo, ne sit pede turpi : 

Metlri possis oculo latus. Hoe. 

— " There is nothing in your way ; through the thin gauze 
dress you may discern her almost as well as if she were 
naked ; you may see that she has neither a bad leg nor 
an ugly foot ; you may survey her form from top to toe 
with your eye." 

Nil opus est dlgitis, per quos arcana loqudris. Ovid. — " There 
is no need there of using the fingers to talk over your 
secrets." 

Nil oriturum alias, nil ortum tale fatentes. Hon. — " Con- 
fessing that none had arisen before, or would arise, like 
unto thee." A compliment to his patron, Augustus. 

Nil peccent oculi, si oculis animus imp&ret. Syb. — " The 
eyes cannot sin if the understanding governs the sight." 
Cicero too says that it is necessary to exercise chastity 
of sight. See also Matt. v. 28. 

Nil prodest quod non l&dcre possit idem. Ovid. — " There is 
nothing advantageous, which may not also be injurious." 
These evils may be caused by carelessness, precipitation, 
or want of moderation. 

Nil proprium ducas quod mutdri potest. Syb. — " Eeckon no- 
thing your own, that can be changed." All worldly pos- 
sessions are of doubtful tenure ; but virtue, philosophy, and 
an enlightened mind, we may call our own. 

Nil sciri si quisputat, id quoque nescit 
An sciri possit, qui se nil scire fatrtur. Lucbet. 



NIL— NIM. 269 

— " If a person thinks that nothing can be known, it ne- 
cessarily follows that he does not know whether or not 
nothing can be known, from his very confession that he 
knows nothing." An answer to the scepticism of the dis- 
ciples of Pyrrho, who maintained that " all that we know 
is, that nothing can be known." 

Nil simllius insdno quam ebrlus. JProv. — u Nothing more 
strongly resembles a madman than a man who is drunk." 

Nil sine magno 
Vita labdre dedit mortfdlbus. Hob. 

— " Life has bestowed nothing on man without great 
labour." 

Nil sine te me 

Prosunt honores. Hoe. 

— " My honours are nothing worth without thy aid." 
An address by the poet to his Muse, entreating her to 
continue her inspiration. 

Nil spernat auris, nee tamen credat statim. Ph^d. — " Let 
the ear despise nothings nor yet let it accord implicit be- 
lief at once." 

Nil tain difficile est, quin qucerendo investigdri possit. Ter. 
— " There is nothing so difficult but Avhat it may be found 
out by seeking." 

Nil tarn difficile est quod non solertia vincat. Prov. — " There 
is nothing so difficult that skill will not overcome it." 

Nil temere novandum. Law Maxim. — " Innovations should 
not be rashly made." 

Nil temere uxbri de servis crede querenti ; 

Scepe etenim mulier quern conjucc dlllgit, odit. Cato. 
— " Do not rashly give credit to a wife complaining of 
servants ; for very often the wife hates the person whom 
the husband most regards." 

Nil volltum quin prcecognitum. — " Nothing can be wished 
for without our having had some thought of it before- 
hand." See Consentire non, &c. 

Nlmia cura deterit magis quam emendat. Prov. — " Too much 
care injures rather than improves." A good thing may be 
spoiled by overdoing it. " Too many cooks spoil the broth." 

Nlmia est miseria pulchrum esse hominem nimis. Plaut. — 
" It is a very great plague to be too handsome a man." 
The words of Pyrgopolinices, a braggart and a fop. 



270 NIM. 

Nimia est voluptas, si diu abfueris a domo 

Domum si redieris,si tihi nulla est agritudo ultimo obviam. 

Plaut. 
— " It is a great pleasure, if you have been long absent, 
when you return home to have no anxieties to grate your 
feelings." 

Nimia familidritas parit contemptum. Prov. — " Too much 
familiarity breeds contempt." 

Nimia illcec licentia 
Profecto evddet in uliquod magnum malum. Tee. 
— " This extreme licentiousness will assuredly end in some 
great disaster." 

Nimia subt'ditas in jure reprobdtur. Law Max. — " Excessive 
refinements in the law are to be reproved." 

Nimio id quod pudet Jucilius fertur, quam illud quod j)iget. 
Plaut. — " That which we are ashamed of is more easily 
endured than that which we are vexed at." 

Nimio pr&stat impendiusum te quam ingrdtum dicier ; 
Ilium lauddbunt boni, hunc Uiam ipsi culpdbunt mali. 

Plaut. 
— " It is much better to be called over-liberal, than un- 
grateful ; the first, good men will applaud ; the latter, even 
bad men will condemn." 

Nimirum insdnus paucis vtdedtur, eo quod 

Maxima pars hominum morbo jactdtur eddem. Hoe. 
— " He, for instance, appears to be mad to but a few, be- 
cause the greater part of them are infected with the same 
disease." 

Nimis arcta premunt olida conv'tvia capras. Hob. — " Rank 
and sweaty odours annoy us at overcrowded entertain- 
ments." A good suggestion for those who think that they 
cannot overcrowd a room. 

Nimis uncis 

Ndribus indulges. Pebs. 

— " You indulge your upturned nostrils too much." The 
nostrils, as Pliny says, were considered the exponents of 
sarcasm and ridicule. 

Nimium altercando Veritas amittitur. Prov.—" In too eager 
disputation, the truth is lost sight of." 

Jsimium difficile est reperiri, iia ui nomen duett, 

Cut tuam cum rem credideris sine omni curddormias. Pli ct. 



NIM— NIT. 271 

— " It is an extreme.y difficult thing for a friend to be 
found to act up to his title, and to whom when you have 
intrusted your interests you may sleep without care." 

Nimium ne crede colori. Virg. — " Trust not too much 

to your good looks." Said by the poet to a conceited youth, 
but applicable to outward appearances in general. 

Nimium risus pretium est, si probiidtis impendio constat. 
Quint. — " A laugh costs too much, if it is bought at the 
expense of propriety." 

Nimius in veritdte, et similitudinis n-icim puichritudinis aman- 
tior. Quint. — " Too scrupulous a3 to the truth, and 
more desirous of exactness than beauty." There are dis- 
agreeable traits in nature, which an artist need not go out 
of his way to copy. Some of the Dutch painters have been 
guilty of this. 

Nisi caste, saltern caute. Prov. — " If not chastely, at least 
cautiously." A Jesuitical hint that at all events we should 
study appearances. 

Nisi dextro tempore fflacci 
Verba per attentam non ibunt Cessans aurem. Hoe. 
— " Unless at an appropriate time, the words of Flaccus 
will not reach the attentive ear of Caesar." 

Nisi Dominus, frustra. — " Unless the Lord is with us, our 
efforts are vain." From Psalm exxvii. 1. The motto of the 
city of Edinburgh, where it has been ludicrously translated, 
" You can do nothing here unless you are a lord !" 

Nisi pr ins. Law Term. — " Unless before." A writ by which 
the sheriff is commanded to bring a jury to "Westminster 
Hall on a certain day, unless the justices shall previously 
come into his county. 

Nisi utile est quod facimus, stulta est gloria. Phjed. — " Un- 
less what we do is useful, vain is our glory." This line is 
said to have been found copied on a marble stone, as part 
of a funeral inscription, at Alba Julia, or Weissemberg, in 
Transylvania. 

Nitlmur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negdta. Ovid. — "We 
are ever striving for what is forbidden, and are coveting 
what is denied us." 

Nitor in adversum, nee me, qui ccetera vincit 

Impetus, et rapido contrdrius evehor orbi. Ovid. 

— "Against this I have to contend; that force which over- 



272 NOB— NOL. 

comes all other things, does not overcome me ; and I am 
borne in a contrary direction to the swiftly moving 
world." 

Nobllitas sola est atque unica virtus. Juv.— " Virtue is the 
' sole and only nobility." 

Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux, 

Nox est perpetua una dormienda. Cattjll. 
— " As soon as our brief day has closed, we shall have to 
sleep in everlasting night." The words of one who did 
not believe in the immortality of the soul. 

Nobis non licet esse tarn disertis, 

Qui Musas cofonus severidres. Mabt. 

— " We, who cultivate the severer Muses, are not allowed 

to be so discursive." 

Nocet empta dolbre voluptas. Hon. — " Pleasure pur- 
chased by pain is injurious." Because pleasure of this 
kind arises from immoderate indulgence. 

Noctemque diemque fatlgat. Vieo. — " He labours both 

night and day." 

Noctis erat medium ; quid non amor improbus audet ? Ovid. 
— " 'Twas midnight ; what does not unscrupulous passion 
^clare?" 

Nocturnd versate manu, versdte diurnd. Hoe. — " Ponder 
these matters by night, ponder them by day." 

Nocumentum, documentum. Prov. — " Harming 's warning." 
" Forewarned, forearmed." 

Nodum in scirpo quwrere. Prov. — " To look for a knot in 
a bulrush." To be too fastidious. 

Nolens volens. — " Whether he will or no." " "Will he, nill he." 

Noli ajfectdre quod tibi non est datum, 
Delusa ne spes ad querelam recidat. P11.ED. 
— " Covet not that which has not been granted you, lest 
your baffled hopes sink down to useless repinings." 

Noli equi dentes insplcere dondti. Prov. — " Look not a gift- 
horse in the mouth." Quoted by St. Jerome. 

Noli me tangere. — " Touch me not." A plant of the genus 
impatiens. On being touched when ripe, it discharges its 
seeds from the capsule with considerable force. The term 
is also applied to an ulcer or cancer ; and sometimes an 
object of extreme costliness is called a " Touch me not." 
See also John xx 17. 



NOL— NON. 273 

———Nolipugndre duolus. Cattjll. — " Don't fight against 
two." " Two to one is odds." 

Nolle prosequi. Law Term. — " To be unwilling to prose- 
cute." An acknowledgment by the plaintiff that he will 
not proceed any further with his suit. 

Nolo episcopdri. — "I have no wish to be a bishop." A 
pnrase which, with a semblance of modesty, was used as 
a matter of form by those who were elevated to a bishop- 
ric. Hence it is used to imply an affectation of indiffer- 
ence about a thing which a person has the greatest am- 
bition to obtain. 

Nomen amicttia est, nomen inane fides. Ovid. — " Friendship 
is but a name, constancy an empty title." 

Nomina honesta prcetenduntur vttiis. Tac. — " Honourable 
names are given as a screen to vices." 

Nomine pcence. Law Term. — "Under name of a penalty." 
A penalty agreed to be incurred on non-payment of rent 
by a given day. 

Non adeo cecidi, quamvis dejectus, ut infra 

Tequoquesim; inferius quo nihil esse potest. Ovid. 

— " Although prostrate, 1 have not fallen so low that I am 

beneath even thee, than whom nothing can be lower." 

Non cetdte verum ingenio adipiscitur sdpieniia. Platjt. — 
"Not by years but by disposition is wisdom acquired." 

Non aTder quam qui adverso vixflumine lembum 
Memigiis sifblgit : si hrdcJiia forte rem'isit, 
Atque ilium in prceceps prono rapit alveus amni. ViRG. 
— " Not otherwise than is he who rows his skiff with much 
ado against the tide ; if by chance he slackens his arms, 
the tide hurries him headlong down the stream." 

Non amo te, Sabldi, nee possum dicere quare ; 

Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te. Mart. 
— " I do not love thee, Sabidius, nor can I say why ; this 
only I can say, I do not love thee." A description of an 
unaccountable aversion. This epigram has been thus trans- 
lated by the facetious Tom Brown ; 

" I do not love thee, Doctor Pell : 
The reason why I cannot tell ; 
But this alone I know full well, 
I do not love thee, Doctor Fell.*' 



274 NON. 

Dr Fell being the dean of Chriat Church, who had threat- 
ened him with expulsion. 

Non ampllter sed mundUer convivium ; plus sails quam sump- 
tus. Corn. Nep. — " An entertainment not profuse but 
elegant; more of true relish than expense." 

Non assumpsit. Law Term. — " He did not undertake." Tho 
general issue in an action of assumpsit, where the defendant 
denies that he undertook to do the thing stated. See As~ 
sumpsit. 

Non aurlga piger. — " No lazy charioteer." Said of a director 
or managing man who will not " let the grass grow under 
his feet" in carrying out an undertaking. 

Non bene conducti vendunt payitria testes. Ovid. — " Wit- 
nesses hired dishonestly make sale of their perjuries." 

Non bene convttniunt, nee in una sede morantur 

Majestas et amor. Ovid. 

— " Majesty and love do not well agree, nor do they dwell 
in the same place." 

Non bene junctdrum discordia sanfua rerum. Ovid. — " The 
discordant atoms of things not harmonizing." A descrip- 
tion of the Btate of Chaos. 

Non bene pro toto libertas vendUur auro ; 
Hoc coeleste bonum praterit orbis opes. 
— " Liberty is not well sold for all the gold ; this heavenly 
blessing surpasses the wealth of the world." 

Non bonus somnus est de prandio. Apage. Plaut. — " Sleep 
is not good after a morning meal — out upon it ! " 

Non caret is, qui non des'idtrat. — " He is not in want who 
has no desires." 

Non compos mentis. — " Not master of his mind." In an un« 
sound state of mind. 

Non constat. Law Term. — " It does not appear." It is not 
shown by evidence before the court. 

Non cuicunque datum est habere nasum. Maet. — " It 

is not every one to whom it has been given to have a 
nose :" meaning a keen wit, and power of satire. 

Non cuivis homini contingit ad'ire Corinthum. Hoe. — " It is 
not the lot of every man to visit Corinth." It is not the 
lot of all men to enjoy the same opportunities of travel or 
improvement. Corinth was the head quarters of luxury 



NON. 275 

and refinement, and it was only the more wealthy who 

could afford to pay a visit to it. 
Non de ponte cadit, qui cum sapientid vadit. — " He falls not 

from the bridge who walks with prudence." A mediaeval 

Leonine proverb. 
Non decet superbum esse horrunem servum. Plaut. — u It is 

not proper for a servant to give himself airs." 
Non decipitur qui scit se decipi. Coke. — " He is not deceived 

who knows that he is being deceived." 
Non deerat voluntas, sed facultas. — " Not the will, but the 

means, were wanting." 

Non dtficit alter. Vikg. — " Another is not wanting." 

We sustain no loss but what can easily be replaced ; or 

the loss of one will be the gain of another. 
Non Dindymene, non adytis quatit 

Mentem sacerdotum incola Pythius, 
Non Liber ceque ; non acuta 
Sic geniinant Gorybantes csra, 

Tristes ut irce. Hoe. 

— "Nor Cybele, nor Pythian Apollo, the dweller in the 

shrines, so convulses the breasts of his priests, nor so does 

Bacchus ; nor do the Corybantes so loudly redouble their 

blows on the shrill cymbals, as direful anger (inflames the 

mind)." 
Non domus et fundus, non ceris acervus et auri 

JEgroto domini deduxit corpore febres, 

Non ammo euros. Hoe. 

— " Neither house nor land, nor heaps of brass and gold, 

can remove the fever from their sick possessor, nor banish 

cares from his mind." 
Non eadem est <stas, non mens. Hoe. — " My age, my 

tastes are now no longer the same." 
Non eadem ratio est, sent'ire et demere morbos : 

Sensics inest cunctis ; tollltur arte malum. OviD. 

— " The art of perceiving diseases and of removing them 

is not the same. Perception exists in all ; by skill alone 

disease is removed." 
■■■ Non ebur neque aureum 

Med renidet in domo lacunar. Hoe. 

— " No ivory or golden ceiling shines resplendent in my 

house." 

T 2 



276 KON. 

Non ego avdrum 

Cum te vetofuri, vappamjubeo ac nebulonem. Hoh. 

— " When I forbid you to be a miser, I do not bid yon 

become a prodigal aiid a spendthrift." 
Non ego iUam mihi dotem esseputo, quce dos dicitur, 

Sed pudicitiam, et pudorem, et seddtam cup'idinem. Plaut. 

— "That which, is called a dowry, I do not deem my dowry, 

but chastity, modesty, and subdued desires." 
Non ego mendusos ausim defendfoe mores, 

Falsdque pro vltiis arma tenere meis. Ovid. 

— " I would not presume to defend my faulty morals, and 

to wield deceitful arms in behalf of my frailties." 
Non ego tnorddci destrinxi carmine quenquam ; 

Nee mens villus crlmina versus habet. OviD. 

— " I have pulled no one to pieces in spiteful verse ; nor 

does my poetry contain a charge against any man." 
Non ego omnlno lucrum omne esse utile homtni existimo. 

Plaut. — " I do not quite believe that every kind of gain 

is serviceable to mankind." 
» Non ego paucis 

Offendar maciilis, quas aut incuriafudit, 

Aut humdna parum cavit natura. Hor. 

— " I will not take offence at a few blemishes which 

either carelessness has caused, or against which human 

nature has failed to be on its guard." 
Non ego ventosce venor suffrngia plebis. Hoe. — " I do not 

hunt after the suffrages of the unsteady multitude." I 

do not solicit their votes. 
Non enim gazas neque consuldris 

Summovet Victor rnistros tumultus 

Mentis et euros laquedta circum 

Tecta volantes. Hob. 

— " For neither regal treasure, nor the consul's lictor, can 

remove the direful tumults of the mind, nor the cares that 

hover about the carved ceilings." 
Non enim potest qucestus consistere, si eum sumptus suptrat. 

Plaut. — " There cannot any profit remain, if the expen- 
diture exceeds it." 
Non enim tarn auctoritdtis in disputando, quam rdtionis mo- 

m'nta qucerenda sunt. Cic. — " In discussing a question, 



NON. 277 

more reliance ought to be placed on the influence of rea- 
son than on the weight of authority." 

Non equidem invldeo, miror maps. Yirg. — " For my 

part, I feel no envy, I am surprised rather." 

Non equidem studeo, bulldtis ut mihi nugis 

J?agina turgescat, dare pondus idbnea fumo. Pees. 

— " I do not study that my page may be swelled out with 

bubbly trifles, suited only to give weight to smoke." 

Non Pquldem vellem ; sed me meafata trahebant, 
Tnque meas pcenas ingPniosus eram. Ovid. 

— " I wish indeed that I had not ; but my destiny drew 
me on, and I exercised my ingenuity to my own undo- 
ing." 

Non esse ciipldum pecunia est : non esse emdcem vectlgal est. 
Cic. — " Not to be covetous is money : not to be fond of 
buying, a revenue." 

Non est. See Non est inventus. 

Non est ad astra mollis a terris via. Sen. — " Not easy is the 
passage from the earth to the stars." It is only by great 
efforts that immortality is to be attained. 

Non est arctius vinculum inter homines quam jusjurandum. 
Law Max. — " There is no stronger bond among men than 
an oath." 

Non est bedtus, qui se non putat ; quid enim refert quails 
status tuus sit, si tibi vidttur malus ? Sen. — " No man is 
happy who does not think himself so ; for what does it 
signify how exalted your position may be, if it appears to 
you undesirable ?" 

Non est bonum ludere cum Diis. Prov. — " It is not good to 
trifle with the gods." It is impossible to deceive an all- 
wise Providence. 

No?i est de sacco tanta farina tuo. — " All that meal is not 
out of your own sack." Said to a man who is palming off 
the work of another as his own. A mediaeval proverb. 

Non est ejusdem et multa et opportuna dJcere. Prov. — " It is 
not easy for the same person to talk much and to the 
purpose." 

Non est factum. Law Term. — " It was not done." Tho 
general issue in an action on bond or other deed, whereby 
the defendant denies that to be hia deed on which he in 
impleaded. 



278 NON. 

Non est in medico semper rPlevHur ut <eger : 
Interdum doctd plus valet arte malum. O v i n. 
— " It is not always in the physician's power that the m* 
valid should recover ; sometimes the disease is more power- 
ful than the resources of art." 

Non est inventus. Law Term. — "He has not been found." 
The return made by the sheriff when a person whom be has 
been ordered to produce cannot be found by him. When 
a man disappears or is not forthcoming, he is jocosely said 
to be non est inventus, or non est. 

Non est jocus esse malignum. Hon. — " There is no 

joking in being spiteful." Genuine humour is compatible 
only with good nature. 

Non est magnus pfimtlio licet in monte constltfrit : Colossus 
magnitudinem suam servdbit, etiam si strtrrit in piiteo. BlW. 
— " A dwarf is no bigger, though he stand on the rommit 
of a mountain : a Colossus will preserve its magnitude, 
though it should stand in a well. Tou cannot improve 
a fool whatever advantages you give him, while the m:»i 
of genius will attain eminence in the greatest obscurity 

Non est meum contra auctbritdfem send ids d'icPre. Cic. — 
" It is not for me to speak against the authority of the 
senate." 

Non est mihi cornea fihra. Prov. — " My nerves are not 
made of horn." I am not unmoved by a tale of misery 
and woe. 

Non est remedium adversus sycophant <e morsum. Prov. — 
" There is no remedy against the bite of a flatterer." 

Non est vlvPre, sed valere, vita. Mabt. — " Not existence, but 
health, is life." 

Non exercitus, neque thesauri, prcsstdia regni sunt, verum 
amid. Sall. — " Neither armies, nor treasures, are the 
safeguards of a state, but friends." 

Non facias malum ut inde veniat bonum. Coke. — " Tou 
must not do evil that good may come of it." 

Non fas est scire omnia. — " We are not allowed to know 
everything.' ' 

Non formbsus erat, sed erat facundus Ulysses. Ovid.— 
" Ulysses was not handsome, but then he was eloquent." 

JSon fumum ex fulgore, sed ex fumo dare lucem. Hob. — 
" Not to prod ice smoke from light, but light from smoke." 



NOST. 279 

In this, says Horace, consists the difference between a 
bad and a good poet. The first begins with a florid and 
inflated prelude, and ends in smoke ; the latter, beginning 
with reserve, attains the height of poetic grandeur. 

Non hdbet commercium cum virtnte voluntas. Cic. — " Plea- 
sure has no fellowship with virtue." Said in reference 
to that kind of pleasure which delights in excess. 

Nan habet in nobis jam nova plaga locum. Ovid. — " A fresh 
wound can now no longer find room in me." 

If on hcec in feeder a. Vikg. — " Not into such alliances 

as these." 

Non hoc de nihilo est. — " This does not come of nothing." 
There is some foundation for this story — there is some- 
thing in it. 

Non hoc ista sibi tempus spectdcala poscit. Virg. — " The 
present moment does not require such an exhibition as 
this." 

Non homtnis culpa, sed ista loci. Ovid.—" It is not the 
fault of the man, but of the place." 

Non horam tecum esse potes, non btia recte 
Ponere, teque ipsum vitas fit gltlvus et erro, 
Jam vino qucerens, jam somno fallPre curam; 
Frustra, nam comes atra premit stquiturque fugacem. Hoe. 
— "You cannot endure an hour by yourself, nor apply 
your leisure advantageously ; a fugitive and vagabond, you 
endeavour to escape from yourself, now endeavouring 
with wine, now with sleep, to cheat care — but all in vain : 
for the gloomy companion presses on you, and pursues 
you as you fly." A fine description of the torture en- 
dured by the wicked man, under the stings of self-re- 
proach. 

Non id quod magnum est pulchrum est, sed id quod pulchrwm 
magnum. — " Not that which is great is praiseworthy, but 
that which is praiseworthy is great." 

Non id videndum, conjugum ut bonis bona, 
At ut ingenium congruat et mores nioribus ; 
Probltas, pudorque virgtni dos optima est. Teb. 
— " It is not requisite that the possessions of the married 
couple should be equal in amount ; but that, in dispo- 
sition and manners, they should be alike. Chastity and 
modesty are the best dowr* a vourur woman can have." 



230 NOX. 

Non igndra mali mistris succurrcre distj. N'lita. — "Not 
unversed in suffering, I learn to succour the wretched." 
The words of Dido to ^Eneas. See Haud ignara, &c. 
Non ilia colo caldthisve Minerva 

Fcemlneas assurta mantis. VlBQ. 

— " Not to the distaff or the work-baskets of Minerva had 
she accustomed her womanly hands." Though originally 
said of Camilla, the female warrior, these words are 
applicable to an indolent and ignorant woman. 

Non ille pro caris aniicis 

Aut patria tlmldus pihr'ire. HOB. 

— " He fears not to die for his beloved friends or for hia 

country." The sentiment of a hero and a patriot. 

Non in caro nidore voluptas 
Summa, sed in teipso est, tu pulmentdria quaere 

Sudando. Hob. 

— " The chief pleasure [in eating] does not lie in the 
rich flavour, but in yourself. Do you seek dainties by 
sweating." The benefit of exercise and the value of a 
good appetite. 

Non intelllgltur quando obrPpit senectus. Cic. — " We do not 
perceive it, while old age creeps on apace." 

Non intelligunt homines quam magnum vectigal sit parsimbnia. 
Cic. — "Men do not understand how great a revenue is 
economy." In accordance with Franklin's saying, that 
" a penny saved is a penny earned." 

Non inv'isa feres pueris munuscula parvis. Hob. — " Tou 
will be the bearer of no unwelcome presents to the chil- 
dren." 

Non ita est, neque cuique mortdlium injuria sum parvce viden- 
tur. Sall. — " It is not so, nor do his own injuries appear 
light to any man." 

Non letum timeo ; genus est miserdhile leti ; 

Demite naufrdgium ; mors mihi minus erit. Ovid. 

— " I fear not death ; it is the dreadful kind of death ; 

take away the shipwreck, and death will be a gain to me." 

Non licet Tibminem esse saepe ita ut vult, si res non sinit. Teb. 
— " A man often cannot be what he would, if circum- 
stances do not permit it." 

Non licet in hello bis peccdre. Prov. — " In war, it is not per- 
mitted twice to err." 



NON. 281 

Non liquet. — " It is not clear." "Words used in the Eoman 
law, when the judge gave the verdict ignoramus, similar to 
that of the Scotch at the present day, "not proven." It 
is called "Ampliation," or a "verdict of ignoramus," and 
neither acquits nor convicts the party accused. 

Non lugenda est mors quam consequitur immortdUtas. ClC. — 
" That death is not to be mourned which is followed by 
immortality." 

Non magni pendis quia contlgit.- - Hor. — " Tou do not 
value it greatly, because it came by accident." 

Non me pudet fatPri nesclre quod nesciam. ClC. — " I am not 
ashamed to confess myself ignorant of that which I do 
not know." 

Non metuis dubio Fortiince stantis in orbe 

Numen, et exbsce verba superba Dece ? Ovid. 
— " Dost thou not fear the Divine power of Fortune, as 
she stands on the unsteady wheel, and of the goddess who 
abhors all boastful words r" 

Non mihi mille placent ; non sum desultor amoris. Ovid. — "A 
thousand girls have no charms for me ; I am no rover in love." 

Non mihi sapit qui sermdne, sed qui factis sapit. Greg. 
Agrigent. — " I esteem a man wise, not according to his 
words, but according to his deeds." 

Non mihi si Ungues centum sint, oraque centum, 
Ferrea vox, omnes possim comprendere. VlRG. 
— " Not though a hundred tongues were mine, a hundred 
mouths, and iron voice, could I include them all." 

Non missura cutem, nisi plena crubris hirudo. Hor. — " A 
leech that will not leave the skin until sated with blood." 

Non nobis, Domine. — " Not unto us, O Lord." The begin- 
ning of the 115th Psalm. Some verses of this Psalm, be- 
ginning as above, have been used for ages as a grace after 
dinner, and are still chaunted at public festivals. 

Non nobis solum nati sumus. Cic. — " We are born not for 
ourselves alone." 

" Not for thyself alone, 
Did Nature form thee." Armstrong. 

Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites. Virg. — " It is 
not for me to settle for you such serious disputes." 

Non nunc ngitur de vectlgdllbus, non de sociurum injuriis ; 
Ubertas H ariima nostra in dubio est. ClC. — " The question 



282 NON. 

is not now as to our revenues,not as to the injuries sustained 
by our allies ; our liberties and our lives are at stake." 

Non obstante veredicto. Law Term. — " The verdict not- 
withstanding." 

Non ticuli tacutre tui. Ovid. — " Your eyes were not 

silent." 

Non omnem motitor quae jiuit unda videt. — " The miller does 
not see everything which is carried past by the stream." 
A mediaeval proverb. 

Non omne quod nitet aurum est. JProv. — " All is not gold 
that glitters." 

Non omnes arbusta iuvant humtlesque myr'icce. Vibo. — " The 
shrubs and the humble tamarisks have not their charms 
for all." 

Non omnes eadem mirantur amantque. Hob. — " All men 

do not admire and love the same objects." Tastes differ. 
So our proverb, " So many men bo many minds." See 
De gustibus, &c, and Quot homines, &c. 

Non omnia eadem eeque omnibus sudvia esse scito. Plal'T. — 
" Know that all things are not equally sweet to all men." 

Non omnia possumus omnes. Virg. — " We cannot any 

of us do everything." Each one is suited for his own 
sphere, and that alone. 

Non omnis error stultitia est dicendus. — " Every error must 
not be called foolishness." A mistake need not be the 
result of systematic folly or weakness. 

Non omnis fert omnia tellus. — " Not every land bears every- 
thing." 

Non omnis moriar ; multaque pars mei 

Vitdbit Llbtfinam. Hor. 

— " I shall not wholly die ; and a great part of me shall 
escape Libitina." Libitina was the goddess who was sup- 
posed to preside over funerals. — Horace here anticipates 
undying fame. 

Non opus admisso subdere calcar equo. — " There is no need 
to spur a horse at full speed." " We must not ride a will- 
ing horse too hard." A mediaeval adaptation from Ovid 

Non opus est rnagnis placido lecture pofitis ; 

Quamlibet invltum difficilemque tenent. Ovtd. 

— " Great poets have no need of an indulgent reader ; they 

captivate one however unwilling and difficult to *>lease." 



NON. 283 

Non placet quern scurrce laudant, manipulates mussitant. 
Plaut. — " I like not the man whom the town-gossipa 
praise aloud, hut of whom his neighbours are silent." 

Non posse bene geri rempublicam multorum imperils. Corn. 
Nep. — " Under the command of many, the affairs of the 
commonwealth cannot he well conducted." "No man 
can serve two masters." See St. Matt. vi. 24. 

Non possidentem multa vocdvPris 
Recte bedtum. Rectius occupat 
Nomen bedti, qui Deorum 
Muneribus sapienter uti, 
Duramque collet pauperiem pati. Hon. 
— " You cannot properly call a man happy because he 
possesses much. He more justly claims the title of hap- 
py, who understands how to make a wise use of the 
gifts of the gods, and how to endure the privations of po- 
verty." 

—Non possum f err e, Quir'ites, 

Grcecam urbem. Juv. 

— " I cannot endure, O Romans ! a Grecian city." 

Non potest severus esse in judicando, qui alios in se severos 
esse judlces non vult. Cic. — " He cannot be impartial in 
judging others, who does not wish others to be strict 
judges of himself." 

Non progrPdi est regredi. JProv. — " Not to go on is to go 
back." Nothing in this world is stationary, and that which 
does not advance retrogrades. 

Non prbnuba Juno, 

Non Hymenceus adest, non illi Gratia lecto ; 

EumPritdes strdvere torum. Ovid. 

— " No Juno, guardian of the marriage rites, no Hyme- 
aeus, no one of the Graces, attended those nuptials. The 
Furies strewed the marriage bed." 

Non propter vitam faciunt patrimonia quidam, 
Sed vitio coeci propter patrimonia vivunt. Jut. 
— " Some persons do not acquire estates for the enjoyment 
of life, but, blind in error, live only for their estates." 

Non piidendo, sed non faciendo id quod non decet, impudentice 
effugere nomen debemus. Cic. — " Not by being ashamed 
of doing, but by avoiding to do, what is unbecoming, we 
ought to shun the imputation of effrontery." 



28-t NON. 

Non purgai peccdta qui negat. Prov. — " He who denies his 

offences does not atone for them." 
Non quam diu, sed quam bene vixPris refert. Sen. — " Not 

how long, but how well, you have lived, is the question." 
Non qui soletur, non qui labentia tarde 

Tempora narrando fallat, amicus adest. Ovid. 

— " There is no friend nigh to console me, no one to be- 
guile my moments with his converse, as they slowly creep 

along." 
Non quia tu dignus, sed quia mitis ego. Ovid. — " Not that 

you were worthy, but because I was indulgent." 
Non quisquam fruitur veris odortbus, 

Hyblaos latPbris nee spuliat Javos, 

Si frontem caveat, si tlmeat rubos. 

Ornat spina rosas, mella tegunt apes. 

— " No one will enjoy the sweet-smelling flowers of spring, 

nor spoil the Hyblaean honeycombs in their concealment, 

if he dreads his face being stung, or fears the brambles. 

The rose is provided with its thorn, the honey protected 

by the bees." 
Non quivis sudvia comPdit edillia. Prov. — " Not every one 

eats nice dainties." See Non cuivis, &c. 
Non quo sed quomddo. — " Not by whom, but how." Motto 

of Lord Howard de Walden. 
Non refert quam multos sed quam bonos libros habeas ac legos. 

Sen. — " It matters not how many, but how good, are the 

books you possess and read." 
Non satis filiciter solere proctdere qua dciilis agas alihiis. 

Livt. — " That business does not usually go on well, which 

you transact with the eyes of other persons." 
Non scholce, sed vita discimus. Sen. — " We learn not at 

school, but in life." Our education is only commenced at 

school. 
Non scribit, cujus carmlna nemo legit. Maet. — " That man 

is not a writer, whose verses no one reads." 
Non semper ea sunt quce videntur ; declpit 

JP/vns prima multos. Pu^D. 

— " Things are not always what they seem to be ; first 

appearances deceive many." 
Nsn semper erit esstas. — " It will not always be summer." 

A translation from Hesiod. 



NON. 285 

Non semper erunt Saturnalia. Prov. — " It will not always 
be holiday time." 

No n semper idem jlbribus est Jionos 
Vernis ; neque uno luna rubens nitet 

Vultu. Hoe. 

— " The same glorious colour does not always remain in 
the flowers of spring, nor does the ruddy moon shine with 
the same aspect." 

Non seqmtur. — " It does not follow." It is not a necessary 
inference. The phrase is sometimes used as a substantive. 

Non si male nunc et olim sic erit. Hon. — " Though matters 
may be bad to-day, they may be better to-morrow." " It 
is a long lane that has no turning." " Heaviness may 
endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning." 
Psalm xxx. 5. 

Non sibi sed toti gemtum se credere mundo. Lucan. — " Tc 
believe himself born not for himself, but for the whole 
world." 

N'on soles respicere te, cum dicas injuste alteri? Plaut. — 
— " Are you not accustomed to look at yourself when you 
abuse another?" 

Non solum scientia qua? est remota a jusfttid, calttdltas potiiis 
quam sapientia est appellanda ; verum etiam animus pardtus 
ad periculum, si sua cupiditdte, non utilitdte communi im~ 
pellitur, auddci& potiiis nomen Tiabet quam fortitudinis. 
Cic. — " Not only may that knowledge which is not go- 
verned by justice be called cunning rather than wisdom ; 
but that courage also which is ready to encounter every 
danger, when impelled by avarice and not the common good, 
may be called audacity, rather than fortitude." 

N'on solum natura sed etiam legtbus populorum constitiitum est, 
ut non Vtceat sui commodi causa nocere alteri. Cic. — " It 
is ordained not only by nature, but also by the law of na- 
tions, that it shall not be allowable for a person to injure 
another for his own benefit." 

Non sum informdtus. Law Latin. — " I am not informed 
thereon." 

Non sum qualis eram. Hor. — "I am not what I once 

was." The words of one who feels the effects of old age. 

Non sum quod fueram. Ovid. — " I am not what I once 

was." 



286 NON. 

Non sum uni angiilo natus : patria mea totus hie est mumlus. 
Sen. — " I was not born for one corner : all the world is 
my country." I am a citizen of the world. 

Non sunt amlci qui degunt procul. Prov. — " They are not 
your friends who live at a distance." See Multas amici- 
tias, &c. 

Non sunt judiciis omnia danda meis. Ovid. — " Every point 
is not to be yielded to my recommendations." 

Non tali auxllio, nee defensortbus istis, 

Tempus eget. VlBO. 

— " We do not, at this time, want such aid as that, nor 
such defenders." 

Non ton ovum ovo simile. Prov. — " More like than one egg 
is to another." 

Non tamportas intrdre patentes, 

Quam fregisse jurat ; nee tarn patiente colono 
Arva premi, quam si ferro pfipulentitr et igni. 
Concessd pudet ire vid. Lucan. 

— " It does not give him so much delight to enter by open 
gates, as to have forced them ; nor so much that the fields 
be ploughed by the patient husbandman, as laid waste by 
fire and sword. He is reluctant to enter by a path con- 
ceded." One of this poet's usual misrepresentations of 
Julius Ca?sar. 

Non tamen intus 

Digna geri promes in scenam : multdque tolles 

Ex oculis, quce mox narret fdcundia prcssens. Hob. 

— " You must not, however, bring upon the stage things 

fit only to be acted behind the scenes ; and you must take 

away from view many actions which an eloquent reciter 

may afterwards in person relate." Murders for instance. 

Non tamen irfitum 

Quodcunque retro est, efficlet ; neque 
Diffinget, infectumque reddet, 
Quodfugiens semel hora vexit. Hob. 

— " Not Heaven will render ineffectual what is past, or 
annihilate and undo what the fleeting hour has once car- 
ried away with it." 

Non temerdrium est, ubi dives blande appellat pauperem 
Plaut. — " It is not for nothing, when a rich man accosts 
a poor one courteously." 



NON. 287 

Non ternere est, quod corvus cantat mihi nunc ah Icevd manu. 
Pla.ut. — " It was not for nothing that the raven was just 
now croaking on my left hand." So in Gray's Pables : 
" That raven on yon left-hand oak 
(Curse on his ill-betiding croak !) 
Bodes me no good." 

Non tu corpus eras sine pectore. Di tibi formam, 
Di tibi divitias dederant, artemque fruendi. Hor. 
— " You are not a body without a soul. The gods have 
given you a beauteous form, the gods have given you 
wealth and the faculty of enjoying it." An elegant com- 
pliment paid by Horace to his friend the poet Tibullus. 

Non tu scis, cum ex alto puteo sursum ad summuni ascenderis, 
Maximum periculum inde esse, a summo ne rursum cadas ? 

Plaut. 
— " Do you not know that when you have ascended from 
a deep well to the top, there is the greatest danger lest 
you should fall back again from the top ?" 

Non umbras node volantes, 
Non timeo strictas in meafata manus. Ovid. 
— " I fear not ghosts that flit by night, or hands armed 
for my destruction." 

Non unquam tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum. — " It never 
hurts us to have kept silence, it hurts us to have spoken." 

Non usitdtd, nee tenuiferar 

Pennd. Hor. 

— " I shall soar on no common, no feeble, wing." 

Non ut diu vlvdmus curandum est, sed ut satis. Sen. — " It 
should be our care to live not long, but well enough." 
Life ought to be distinguished not so much by a number 
of years as by good actions. 

Non ut placidis coeant immitia, non ut 

Serpentes dvibus geminentur, tlgrtbus agni. H.OR. 
— " Not to such a degree that the tame should unite with 
the savage ; nor that serpents should be coupled with 
birds, lambs with tigers." A sample of inconsistency. 

Non uti libet, sed uti licet, sic vivimus. Prov. — " We must 
live not as we like but as we can." We must " make a 
virtue of necessity." See Ut quimus, &c. 

Non uxor salvum te vult, nonfllius : omnes 

Viclni oderunt, noti, pueri, atque puella. Hor. 



288 NON— NOS. 

— " Neither thy wife nor thy son wishes well ii thee; 
all thy neighbours hate thee, thy acquaintances, even 
the very boys and girls." Addressed to a miser, hated 
by all. 

Non vis esse iracundus ? ne sis curidsus. Qui inqulrk, quid 
in se dictum sit, se ipse inquietat. Sen. — " Do you wish 
not to be angry ? be not inquisitive. He who inquires 
what has been said of him, torments himself." 

Non zelus sed charitas. — " Not your good wishes, but your 
charity." A mediaeval expression. 

Nonumque premdtur in annum. Hob. — "And let it be 

kept back up to the ninth year." A recommendation to 
dramatic writers to expend the greatest care upon their 
productions. 

Noris quam ilPgans formdrum spectator fiem. Tee. — 

u You shall see how nice a judge ot beauty I am." 

■ Nos decfbat 

LugPre ubi esset dltquis in lucem edttus, 
Humana vita? varia rPpiitantes mala, 
At qui labures morte finisset graves, 
Omnes amlcos laude et lajtftid exequi. ClC. 
— "We ought to grieve when a being is born into the 
world, thinking of the various evils of human life; but 
when, by death, a man has closed his toilsome labours, all 
his friends should be affected with feelings of congratu- 
lation and joy." A quotation from Euripides. 

Kos frdglli vastum ligno sulcdvtmus aquor. OviD. — " We 
have ploughed the vast ocean in a frail bark." 

Nos hcec novlmus esse nihil. Maet. — " We know that 

these things are nothing at all." Mere trifles. 

Nos in vitium credula turba sumus. Ovid. — " We are a 

multitude prone to vice, ever ready to be led astray." 

Nos patriae fines et dulcia linquimus arva. Vieo. — " We quit 
the limits of our native land, we bid our pleasant plains 
farewell." 

Nos populo damics. Sen. — " We go with the crowd." We 
do as the world does. 

iVos quoque, qua ferimus, tulimus putientius ante ; 

Et mala sunt longo multiplicdta die. Ovid. 

— " I too at first endured my sufferings with patience ; 
and by length of time my evils have been multiplied." 



NOS—XOV. 289 

Nos te, 

Nosfaclmus, Fortuna, deam. Jut. 

— " It is we, Fortune, it is we that make thee a goddess." 

See Nullum numen habes, &c. 
.Nbsce tempus. Prov. — " Know your opportunity." " Make 

hay while the sun shines." 
Noscenda est mensilra sui spectandaque reins 

In siimmis mlnimisque. JlJV. 

— " One should know one's own measure, and keep it m 

view, in the greatest and in the most trifling matters." 
Nosc7tur ex sociis. Prov. — " He is known from his com- 
panions." An estimate of his character is to be formed 

from the company he keeps. " Birds of a feather," &c. 
Nosse hcec omnia salus est adolescentulis. Tee. — " To know 

all these things is salvation for youth." 
Nostra sine auxilio fiigiunt bona ; carplte florem. Ovtb. — 

" Our advantages fly irretrievably ; then gather flowers 

while ye may." 
Nostri farrago libelli. Hob. — " The medley of my 

book." 
Nota bene. — "Mark well!" note well. Often signified by 

N.B., calling the reader's attention in especial to what 

follows. 
-Nota mala res optuma est. Platjt. — "A bad thing is 



best known. 

Notes Tirdnidnce. — " Tironian notes." Short-hand writing 
was so called in the earlier part of the middle ages, from 
Tullius Tiro, the freedman of Cicero, who was supposed 
to have invented it. 

Notandi sunt tlbi mores. Hob. — " You must study the 

manners of men." 

Notltiam primosquc gradus viclnia fecit ; 

Tempore crevit amor. Ovid. 

— " Proximitj'- caused their first acquaintance, and tbeir 
first advances in love ; with time their affection in 
creased." 

Novdcula in cotem. Prov. — " The razor against the whet- 
stone." Sharp as he is, he has met his match. See 
Pragili qucerens, &c. 

Novi ego hoc sceclilum, mdrtbus quihis siet. Plaih. — " I knovu 
this age, what its manners are." 

1 



290 NOV— NTJL. 

Novi ingTnium multfrum, 

Nolunt ubi velis, v.bi nolis ciipiunt vitro. Tee. 

— " I know the disposition of women ; when you will they 

won't, when you won't they will." 

Novos aniico8 dum paras, vUtres cole. — " While you cultivate 
new friendships, preserve your old ones." For remember, 
that it takes time to make friends. 

Novum intervPnit vttium et cdldmltas, 
JJt neque spectdri neque cognosci poturrit : 
Ita populus studio stupid us in funambulo 

Ariimum occupdrat. Ter. 

— "An universal disaster and calamity interrupted [my 
play], so that it could not be witnessed throughout or 
estimated: so much had the populace, carried away with 
silly admiration, devoted their attention to some rope- 
dancing." 

Novus homo. — " A new man." A man of yesterday ; a mush- 
room, an upstart. 

Nox atra cava circumvolat umbrd. Vmo. — " Black night 

envelopes them with her surrounding shade." 

Nox erat ; et blfores intrdbat luna fenestras. Ovid. — "It 
was night, and the moon entered at the windows with 
their double shutters." 

Noxice poena par esto. Cic. — " Let the punishment be equal 
to the offence." 

Nuces relinqutre. — " To leave the nuts." To lay aside child- 
ish amusements. 

Nudum pactum. Law Term. — "A naked agreement." A 
bare promise, made in words only, and not confirmed by 
a written contract. 

Nugce canora. Hoe. — " Melodious trifles." Agreeable non- 
sense. 

Nugis addrre pondus. Hoe. — " To add weight to trifles." 

' Nulla acon'da biluntur 

FicfiUbus. Juv. 

— " No wolfsbane is drunk out of earthen vessels." The 
peasant is in no danger of poison when eating from his 
humble dish — because there is no inducement to put an 
end to his life. 

Nulla &tas ad perdiscendum est. St. Ambeose. — " There is 
no age past learning." 



NUL. 291 

Nulla bona. Law Phrase. — "No goods," or "no assets." 

Nulla capitdlior pestis quam voluptas corporis Jiomlnibus a 
naturd data. Cic. — " No pest more deadly has by nature 
been allotted to men than sensual indulgences." 

Nulla dies abeat, quin llnea ducta supersit. Prov. — " Let no 
day pass by, without a line being drawn and left in re- 
membrance of it." No day should be allowed to pass 
without leaving some memorial of itself. 

Nulla discordia major quam quce a religibne fit. — " No ani- 
mosities are more bitter than those which arise from re- 
ligion." See Odium theologicum. 
Nulla est sincera voluptas ; 

Solltcitique aVtquid l&tis intervenit. Ovid. 

— " No pleasure is without alloy ; some anxiety always in- 
terferes with our joys." See Medio de, &c. 

Nulla falsa doctrlna est, qua? non permisceat aliquid veritdtis. 
— " There is no doctrine so false as not to be mingled with 
some truth." 

Nulla fere causa est, in qua non faemina litem 

Moverit. Juv. 

— " There is hardly any dispute, in which a woman did not 
cause the breach." 

liulla ferent talem sacla futura virum. — " No future ages 
will produce such a man." 

Nulla fides regni sociis, omnisque potestas 

Impatiens consortis erit. LtTCAN. 

— " There is no faith between the sharers in rule, and 
all power will be impatient of a sharer." See Summa 
sedes, &c. 

Nulla herba aut vis mortis tela frangit. — " No herb or mighi 
can break the darts of death." 

Nulla potentia supra leges esse debet. Cic. — " There ought 
to be no power above the laws." 

Nulla quidem sano grdvior mentisque potenti 

Poena est, quam tanto displicuisse viro. Otid. 
— " There is no punishment more severe to a man of 
principle and good sense, than to have displeased so dis- 
tinguished a person." 

Nulla re facllius concilidtur benevolentia multitudinis, quam 
absttnentid et coniinentid. Cic. — " By nothing is the good 
v 2 



292 MJL. 

will of the multitude more easily conciliated, than by ab- 
stinence and moderation." 

Nulla recordanti lux est ingrdta gravisque, 
Nulla fuit cujus non mhnlntsse vclit. 
Ampliat cetatis spatium sibi vir bonus, hoc est 

Vivere bis, vita posse prior e frui. Mart. 

— " No day can be cause of grief and bitter reflection to a 
good man, none is there which he is unwilling to remem- 
ber: he prolongs the period of existence, and may be 
said to live twice, in that he can enjoy the days that are 
past." 

Nulla repariiblli* arte, 
L&sa pudlcitia est. Ovid. 

— " Chastity, once tarnished, can be restored by no 
art." 

Nulla res tantum ad discendum profidt quantum scriptio. CiC. 
— "Nothing has bo greatly assisted learning, as the art 
of writing." 

Nulla salus bello. Vibo. — "There is no safety in war." 

Nulla scabies scabiosior super stitione. — " No itch more infec- 
tious than superstition." 

Nulla tarn bona est fortuna, de qud nil possis queri. Syr. — 
"There is no fortune so good, but you may find some- 
thing to complain of." 

Nulla unquam de morte homlnis cunctdtio longa est. Juv. — 
" When a man's life is at stake, no deliberation can be too 
long." 

Nulla venendto litera mixta joco est. Otid. — " Not a letter 
of my writings is sullied by a malevolent joke." 

Nulla vitcE pars vacdre officio potest. CiC. — " No period of 
life is exempt from its duties." 

Nullce sunt occultiores insidiue quam ece qua latent in simuld- 
tii'me officii, aut in dliquo necessitudinis nomine. Cic. — 
" There are no acts of treachery more deeply concealed 
than those which lie veiled beneath a semblance of kind- 
ness, or under some plea of necessity." 

Nullam habent persondrum rdtionem. Cic. — " They are no 
respecters of persons." 

Nulldque mortdles prater sua littora norant. Ovid. — " And 
mortals knew no shores beyond their own." A descrip- 



NUL. 298 

tion of the ignorance of mankind in the earlier ages of 
the world. 

Nulli est hommi perpetuum bonum. Platjt. — " No man en- 
joys blessings to last for ever." 

Nulli jactantius mosrent, quam qui maxime lastantur. Tac. — 
" None mourn with such loud sorrow as those who are in 
reality the most delighted." 

Nulli negatiimus, nulli differPmus justitiam. — " To no man 
will we deny, to no man will we delay, the administration 
of justice." This assurance is given in Magna Charta, 
the charter of our liberties. 

Nulli secundus. — " Second to none." 

Nulli suis peccdtis impediuntur quo minus alterius peccdta 
demonstrdre possint. — " None are prevented by their own 
faults from pointing out the faults of another." 

Nulli tdcuisse nocet, nocet esse lociltum. — " To be silent 
hurts no one ; to be talkative does the mischief." 

Nulli tarn feri affectus ut non discipllnd perdomentur. — " No 
propensities are so unbridled that they may not be sub- 
dued by discipline." 

> Nullis amor est medicdbilis herbis. Ovid. — " Love is to 

be cured by no drugs." 

■ Nullis fraus tuta latebris. Cameeaeius. — " In no con- 
cealment is fraud safe." 

Null ms addictus jurdre in verba magistri, 

Quo me cunque rapit tempestas, dPfVror hospes. Hob. 
— "Not pledged to swear by the words of any master, 
I am borne as a guest wherever the weather drives me." 
Horace here owns himself an eclectic philosopher, and not 
an adherent of any one sect. 

Nullum d labore me recllnat btium. Hoe. — " No intermis- 
sion affords me repose from my labours." 

Nullum anarchid majus est malum. — " There is no greater 
evil than anarchy." 

Nullum ego sum numen, quid me immortdttbus aquas ? — " I am 
no divinity ; why do you put me on a level with the gods ? " 

Nullum est malum majus, quam non posse ferrc malum. — 
" There is no greater misfortune than not to be able to 
endure misfortune." 

Nullum est nunc dictum, quod sit non dictum prius. Tse.— 



294 NUL. 

" There i* nothing said now, that has not been said bo« 

fore." 
Nullum imperium tutum nisi benevolent id munltum. Cohx. 

Nep. — " No empire is secure unless it is supported by the 

good will [of the people]." 
Nullum infortunium solum. — " No misfortune comes singly." 

Misfortunes never come alone. "It never rains but it 

pours." A mediaeval proverb. 
Nullum iniquum in jure preesumendum est. Law Max. — " No 

injustice is to be presumed in the law." It is not to be 

presumed that the law will sanction anything that is un- 
just. 
Nullum magnum ingtniwn sine mixtiird drmcnti(v. Sex. — 

" There is no great genius without a tincture of madness." 

It is a common saying, that every man is mad upon some 

point. Dryden says, 

" Great wits are sure to madness near allied, 
And thin partitions do their bounds divide." 

This was originally a saying of Aristotle. 
Nullum magnum malum quod extremum est. Corn. Nep. — 

" No evil is great if it is the last we have to bear." Death 

being the last. 
Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia. — " No protecting deity 

is wanting, if there is prudence." An adaptation of the 

following line of Juvenal. 
Nullum numen babes, si sit prudentia : nos te, 

Nos faclmus, Fortfma, deam, coeloque locumus. Juv. 

— " Had we but foresight, thou wouldst have no divinity. 

It is we, Fortune, it is we that make thee a goddess, and 

place thee in the heavens." 
Nullum simile quatuor ptdibus currit. Prov. quoted by Lord 

Coke. — "No simile runs on all fours ;" or, as Coke says, 

" No simile holds in everything." There are no two things 

alike in every respect. 
Nullum sine nomine saxum. Lucan. — " Not a stone is 

without a name." Every spot in such a city as Troy had 

been distinguished by some memorable event. 
Nullum tempus oceurrit regi. Coke. — " No time precludes 

the king." No lapse oi lime bars the rights of the 

crown. 



NUL— NCTN. 295 

Nullus argento color est, — 

nisi temperdto 

Splendeat usu. Hor. 

— " Money has bo splendour of its own, unless it ehinea 

by temperate use." 
Nullus commddum capere potest de injuria sua propria. Law 

Max. — "No person may take advantage of his own wrong." 

The law will not allow a man to derive advantage from an 

act in which he has wrongfully taken part. 
Nullus dolor est quern non longinqultas temporis rrCinuat ac 

molliat. Cic. — "There is no suffering which length of 

time will not diminish and soften." 
Nullus est liber tarn malus, ut non all qua parte prosit. — "There 

is no book so bad, as not to be useful in some way or 

other." A saying of the Elder Pliny, quoted by his 

nephew, Pliny the Younger. 
Nullus illi nasus est. — " He has no nose." He is dull and 

void of sagacity. 
Nullus pernicidsior Tiostis est, quam familidris inimJcus. — 

" No foe is more pernicious than an enemy in the disguise 

of a friend." 
Nullus tantus quastus, quam quod Tiabes parcere. Prov. — 

"There is no gain so sure as that which results from 

economizing what you have." "A penny saved is a 

penny gained." See Non intelligunt homines, &c. 
Nullus unquam amdtor adeo est calllde 

Facundus, qua? in rem sint suam, loqui possit. Plaut. 

— " No lover is ever so skilled in eloquence, as to be able 

to give utterance to that which is for his own interest." 
Num vobis tinniPbant aures ? Plaut. — " Did not your ears 

tingle ? " A sign that somebody is talking of you. 
Numerisque fertur 

Lege solutis. Hor. 

— " And he is borne along in numbers unfettered by laws." 

He treats with utter contempt all poetic rules. This 

quotation was happily applied by Burke when the mob 

carried Wilkes on their shoulders. 
NnmPrus certus pro incerto ponttur. — " A certain number is 

used for an uncertain one." That is to say, when wo 

speak in round numbers, as we call them. 
Nunc (iriimis opus, JEnea, nunc pectore jirmo. Virg. — " Now, 

iEneas, you have need oi courage, and a resolute heart," 



296 NUN. 

Nunc dimittis. — " [Lord,] now lettest thou [thy servant] de- 
part [in peace.]" The beginning of the song of Simeon 
in the Temple. Luke i. 29 

Nunc Ctiam somni pingues, nunc frig" dus humor; 

Et liquidum tenui guttnre cantut MM. Ovm. 

— "Now the slumbers are sound, now the moisture of 
the morn is refreshing ; the birds too are sweetly war- 
bling with their little throats." 

Nunc mare, nunc sylvce 

Threicio Aquilone sonant ; rdpidmus, am'ici, 

Occdsionem de die. Hob. 

— " Now the sea, now the woods resound with t he Thra- 
cian north-east wind ; let us, my friends, seize the oppor- 
tunity offered by this auspicious day." 
■ Nunc omnis ager, nunc omnis parturit arbos, 
Nuncfrondent sylvce, nunc formosisstmus annus. Vibg. 
— "Now every field is green, every tree puts forth its 
shoots, now are the woods in leaf, and the season is most 
beauteous." 

Nunc pdtimur long a pads mala ; sawior armis 

Luxiiria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur orbem. Juv. 
— " Now do we suffer the evils of prolonged peace ; luxury 
more ruthless than the sword broods over us, and 
avenges a conquered world." A picture of Kome in its 
decline. 

Nunc pro tunc. Law Term. — " Now for then." 

Nunc retrorsum 

Vela dare, atque iterdre cursus 

Cogor relictos. Hob. 

— " I am now obliged to tack about, and to regain the 
track I had deserted." 

Nunc scio quid sit Amor : duris in cautibus ilium 
Lsmdrus, out Hhodope, aut extremi Gardmantes, 
Nee gPnP.ris nostri purrum, nee sanguinis, edunt. Vibo. 
— " Now I know what Love is : lsmarus, or Rhodope, or 
the remotest Garamantes produced him on rugged cliffs, 
a child not of our race or blood." 

Nunc si nos audis, atque es div'inus, Apollo, 
Die mihi, qui nummos non habet unde petat ? 
— " Now if you listen to us, and are a god, Apollo, tell 
ttie whence he who has got no money is to get it ?" 



arms. 297 

Nunc tuum ferrum in igni est. Prov. — " Now your iron is 
in the fire." " Strike while the iron is hot." 

Nunquam ad liquidum fama perdilcitur. — " Rumour never can 
be brought to state things with clearness." 

Nunquam aliud natura, aliud sdpientia dicit. Jut. — " Na- 
ture never says one thing, wisdom another." 

Nunquam erit alienis gravis, qui suis se concinnat levem. 

Plattt. 
— " He will never be despised by others, who makes him- 
self respectedby his own relations." 

Nunquam est jidiilis cum potente socittas. Ph^d. — " An 
alliance with the powerful is never sure." 

Nunquam igttur satis laudari digne poterit philosophia, cui qui 
par eat, omne tempus cetdtis sine molestid possit degere. Cic. 
— " Philosophy therefore can never be sufficiently praised ; 
for he who is obedient to her laws may pass through 
every stage of life without discontent." 

Nunquam in vita mihi fuit melius. Platjt. — " Never in my 
life was I better," — in better circumstances. 

Nunquam ita quisquam bene subduct a rations ad vitam fuit, 
Quin res, cetas, usus, semper dltquid apportet novi, 
Aliquid moneat ; ut ilia, quae te scire credos, nesclas, 
Et quae tibi putdris prima, in experiundo nunc repudies. 

Teh. 
— " Never was there any person of such well-trained 
habits of life, but experience, age, and custom were always 
bringing him something new, or suggesting something; 
so much so, that what you believe you know, you don't 
know, and what you have fancied of first importance to 
you, on making trial you reject." 
Nunquam libertas grdtior extat 

Quam sub rege pio. Claud. 

— " Liberty is never more inviting than under a pious 
king." Good government and a rational degree of liberty 
are then united. 

Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus. Cic. — "Never 
less alone than when alone." The words of a philoso- 
pher, who estimated the pleasures of self-communion and 
reflection. 

Nunquam nimis curare possunt suum parentem filice. Plaut. 



298 NUN— O. 

— "Daughters can never take too much sare of their 
father." 

Xunquam nimis d'icitur, quod nunquam satis discitur Sen. — 
" That is never too often repeated, which is never suffi- 
ciently learned." 

Xunquam potest non esse virtuti locus. Sen. — " Room can 
never be wanting for virtue." 

Xunquam sunt grati qui nocuere sales. — " "Witticisms are 
never agreeable which are productive of injury." 

Xunquam vidi inlquius concert atibnem compdrdtam. Ter. — 
" 1 never saw a more unequal contest." 

Xu liquid vita mimum commode perfgisset ? — " Whether he had 
not well played his part in the comedy of life?" Tho 
question put to his friends by Augustus C»sar on his 
death-bed. 

Xusquam nee opera sine emolumento, nee emolument urn ferme 
sine bp&rd, impensa est. Livy. — "There i^ n owh ere labour 
without profit, and seldom profit without labour." 

Xusquam tuta fides. Vino. — " Confidence is nowhere 

safely placed." Such is the case in times of civil com- 
motion. 

Xutrit pax CPr&rem, pads arnica Ceres. Ovid. — " Peace 
nourishes Ceres, Ceres is the friend of peace." 

A utu Dei, non cceco casu, r^glmur et nos et nostra. — " By the 
will of God, not by blind chance, are we and all things be- 
longing to us governed." 



0. 

O, 0, O. — Certain prayers or anthems in the Roman Catho- 
lic church were called the O, O, O's, as they severally 
begin with sapieniia, O radix, O Adona'i, Ac. : they 
are sung in the evening for nine days before Christmas 
day. 

bedta sdriitas, te preesente amcenum 

Yer floret gratiis ; absque te nemo beritus. 
— " Oh blessed health! when thou art present the joyous 
spring blossoms in all its gracefulness : without thee nj 
one is happy." 



O. 299 

— — e&ca nocentum 

Consilia, O semper timidum scelus ! Statitts. 

— " Oh how blind are the counsels of the guilty ! Oh how 

cowardly at all times is wickedness !" 

Cory don, Cory don, secretum dlvitis ullum 

Esse putas ? Servi ut tdceant. Jtrv. 

— " Oh Corydon, Corydon, do you suppose that anything 
a rich man does can be secret ? even if the servants hold 
their tongues." 

O curas hominum ! O quantum est in rebus inane ! Pees. — 
" Oh ! the cares of men ! Oh ! how much vanity there is 
in human affairs!" " Vanity of vanities; all is vanity." 
Eccles. i. 2. 

O curves in terris ariimce, et coslestium indnes! — " Oh! grovel- 
ling souls on earth, how devoid of all that is heavenly !" 

O faclles dare summa Deos, eddemque tuPri 

Difficiles. Lucan. 

— " How ready are the gods to bestow on us prosperity, 
how averse to insure our tenure of it !" 

for tuna, viris invlda fortibus, 

Quam non aqua bonis prcemia dlvldis ! Sen. 

— " Oh fortune, envious of able men, what an unequal share 

of thy prizes dost thou award to the good !" 

O fortundtam, natam, me consule, Romam ! — " Oh happy 
Rome, when I was consul, born." The only line that 
has come down to us of Cicero's unfortunate attempts at 
poetry. The jingle between the second and third words 
is the great deformity, though the line is otherwise 
meagre enough. Juvenal, to whom we are indebted for 
the preservation of it, says that Cicero "might have scorn- 
ed the sword of Antony, if all he uttered had been iiko 
this." 

Ofortundti nimium, sua si bona norint, 

Aqrfeolce, quibus ipsa, procul discordlbus armis, 
Fundit humo facllem victum justisstma tellus. Vieg. 
— " Oh ! husbandmen more than happy, if they did but 
know their own advantages ; for whom, far from discordant 
arms, the grateful earth pours forth from her bosom a 
ready abundance." The first line is often applied to that 
rather large class of people who " don't know when they 
are well off." 



300 O. 

O! hcbetudo et durltia cordis humani, qua solum proven tia 
meditdtur et futura non magis pravldet. A Kempis, De 
Im. Christi. — "Oh! the dulncss and the hardness of the 
heart of man, which contemplates only the present, and 
not rather the things of futurity." 

01 imitatbres! servum pecus ! Hor. — "Oh! ye imitators, 

a servile herd !" In allusion to the low position occupied 
by the plagiary and copyist. 

O major tandem, parens, insane, minbri. Hob. — " Oh ! thou 
who art still more mad, spare me, I pray, who am not sc 
mad." A phrase used ironically in paper warfare. 

O mihi prceterttos rtferat si Jupiter annos ! VlKG. — " Oh I 
that Jupiter would but give me back the years that are 
past!" 

O mihi tarn longa maneat pars ultima vita, 

Spirltus et quantum sat erit tua dl cere facta ! VlBO. 
— " Oh ! may my last stage of life continue so long, and 
may so much breath be granted me as shall suffice to sing 
thy deeds!" 

miseras hbmlnum mentes, O pectbra caeca I Lucbet. — 
" Oh ! how wretched are the minds of men, oh ! how blind 
are their understandings!" Applicable to popular delu- 
sions. 

O munera nondum 

Intellecta Deum. Lucan. 

— " Oh gifts from the gods, not yet understood." 

O nimium fuclles ! O toto pectore capta ! Ovin. — " Oh 
people too credulous! Oh people utterly gone mad !" 

nimium nimiumque obllte tubrum. Ovid. — " Oh . far 

too far, forgetful of your kin !" 

O passi gravibra ! Vibg. — " Oh ye who have suffered 

greater dangers than these." 

O pracldrum diem cum ad Mud divlnum animorum concilium 
coetumque projiciscar. Cic. — " Oh happy day, when I shall 
hasten to join that holy council and assemblage of spirits! " 
A proof how highly this great philosopher appreciated the 
doctrine of the immortality of the soul. 

quanta species cerebrum non habet ! Ph^db. — " Oh that; 
such beauty should have no brains." See the Fable )f 
the Fox and the Mask. 

O rus, quando te aspiciam ? quandbque licebit 



o— obs. aoi 

Nunc vUPrum Hbris, nunc somno et inertllus lions 
Diccere sollicitce jucunda obllvia vitce ? Hor. 

— " Oh rural retreat, when shall I behold thee ? and when 
shall it be in my power to enjoy the pleasing forgetfulnesa 
of an anxious life, one while with the books of the ancients, 
another while in sleep and leisure ?" 

! si sic omnia I — " Oh ! had he acted thus in all things ! " 
or, " Oh ! that all were thus !" 

O suavis ariima ! qualem te dicam bonam • 

AntPhac fuisse, tales cum sint reliquiae I Ph^edr. 

— " Oh the delicious fragrance ! how good I should say 

were your former contents, when the remains of them are 

such!" 

O tempora ! O mores ! Cic. — " Oh times ! Oh manners ! " 
The exclamation of Cicero when inveighing against the 
impunity of wicked men. 

vita, misPro longa, fel'ici brevis ! Syr. — " Oh life, how long 
to the wretched, how short to the happy !" 

vitce philosophia dux ! O. virtutis indagdtrix, expultrixque 
vitiorum ! quid non modo nos, sed omn'mo vita hominum 
sine te esse potuisset. Tu urbes pPperisti ; tu dissipdtos 
homines in societdtem vitce convocasti. Cic. — " Oh ! Philo- 
sophy, guide of life. Oh ! searcher out of virtues and ex- 
peller of vices ! what could we have done without thee ? 
And not only we, but every age of man ? It is thou that 
didst form cities; thou that didst call together solitary 
men to the enjoyment of the social intercourse of life." 

Obiter cantdre. Petrok. Arbiter. — " To sing by the way." 

Obiter dictum. — "A thing said incidentally," or "by the 
way." Parenthetically. 

Obldtam occasionem tene. Cic. — " Seize the opportunity 
when it offers." Seize "the golden moments as they 
fly." " Take time by the forelock." 

Obruat Mud male partum, male retentum, male gestum, impe- 
rium. Cic. — " May that sovereignty fall which has been 
evilly acquired, which is evilly retained, and which is 
evilly administered." 

Obscuris vera involvem. Virg. — " Involving the truth 

hi obscurity." The subterfuge of the person who has the 
worst of an argument. 

Obsciirum facere per obscurius. — " To make that darker 



302 OBS— OCC. 

which was dark enough before." To render, in an attempt 
to illustrate, obscurity doubly obscure. See Lucia a 
non, &c, and Non sequitur. 

Obsecro, tuum est ? vetus credtderam. — " Pray, is it yours ? I 
really had thought it old." The proper answer to a pla- 
giary. 

Obsequium amlcos, Veritas odium parit. Tee. — " Obsequious- 
ness begets friends, truth hatred." Words uttered in a 
complaining spirit. 

— Observantior cequi 

Fit popiilus, necferre vetat cum viderit ipsum 

Auctorem parere sibi. Claud. 

— " The people becomes more observant of justice, and re- 
fuses not to support the laws, when it sees the author of 
them obeying his own enactments." 

Obstupui, steteruntque coma, et vox faucibus hcesit. Viuo. 
— "I was amazed, my hair stood erect, and my voice 
cleaved to my throat." A picture of horror and alarm. 

Obstupui, tdcltus sustinuique pedem. Ovid. — "I stood 
amazed, and in silence I made a pause." 

Occdsio facit furem. Frov. — " Opportunity makes the thief." 

Occasionem cognosce. — "Know your opportunity." 

Occdsio prima sui parte comosa, posteriori parte calva, quam 
si occupdris, tineas ; elapsam semel, non ipse Jupiter possit 
reprehendPre. — " Opportunity has hair in front, behind 
she is bald ; if you seize her by the forelock, you may hold 
her; but, if she once escapes, not Jupiter himself can 
catch her again." See also Rem tibi, &c, and Phaedrus, 
Fab. B. v. F. viii., from which the latter part of the quota- 
tion is taken. 

Occ/dit misPros crambe repetita. Juv. — " The same stale 

cabbage, everlastingly hashed up, wears out their wretched 
lives." Said in reference to the drudgery of a teacher's 
life. 

Occidit una domus : sed non domus una perlre 

Dignafuit. Ovid. 

— " Thus did one house fall : but not one house alone de- 
served to perish." 

Occultdre morbum funestum. — " To conceal disease is fatal." 
See JPrincipiis obsta, &c. 

Occiipet extremum scabies I Hob. — " May the itch seize 



OCU— ODE. 803 

the hindmost." Like our proverb, " The devil take the 
hindmost." 

Oculi tanquam speculatores altissimum locum obttnent. Cic. 
— " The eyes, like sentinels, occupy the highest place [in 
the body]." 

Oculis magis habenda fides quam auribus. Prov. — " It is 
better to trust our eyes than our ears." Ocular demon- 
stration is better than hearsay. 

Oculos, paulum tellure mordtos, 
Sustulit ad, procPres ; expectdtoque resolvit 
Ora sono ; nee abest facundis gratia dictis. Ovid. 
— " Fixing his eyes for a short time on the ground, he 
raised them towards the chiefs, and opened his lips in 
accents not unlooked for ; nor was persuasiveness want- 
ing to his eloquent words." Descriptive of the manner of 
Ulysses, when pleading before the Grecian chiefs for the 
arms of Achilles. 

Octdus dexter mihi salit. Prov. — " My right eye twitches." 
I shall see the person whom I have long wished to 
see. 

Oculus domini sag'tnat equum. Prov. — "The master's eye 
makes the horse fat." This is illustrated in Phaedrus' 
Fable of the Stag and the Oxen, B. ii. F. viii. 

OdPrint modo metuant. — " Let them hate, so long as they fear 
me." The sentiments of a tyrant. These words were 
often in the mouth of the Emperor Tiberius, who, in his 
turn, lived in perpetual fear of his subjects. 

OdPro si potero, si non, invltus amdbo. Ovid. — " I will hate 
if I can; if not, I will love against my will." Hoinsius 
doubts however if this line was written by Ovid. 

OdPrunt hilarem tristes, tristemque jocosi, 

Seddtum celPres, aqllem gnavumque remissi. Hoe. 
— " The melancholy hate those who are cheerful ; the gay, 
the melancholy ; the bustling hate the sedate ; the indo- 
lent, the brisk and active." These opposite classes of 
people have few or no sympathies in common. 

OdPrunt peccdre boni virtfitis amore, 
OdPrunt peccdre mali form'tdlne pcenae. 
— " The good hate to sin from love of virtue ; the bad 
hate to sin from fear of punishment." The first line is 
from Horace, the second from an unknown source. 



804 ODI— OLE. 

Odi ego aurum ! multa multis saspe suasit perperam. Plait. 

— " Gold I detest ; many a one has it persuaded to many 

an evil course." 
Odi memorem compotbrem. — " I hate a boon companion with 

a good memory." See Aut bibeat, &c. 
Odi, nee possum cupiens non esse quod odi. Ovid.—" I hate 

this state ; nor, though I wish it, can I be otherwise than 

what I hate to be." 
Odi profdnum vulgus et arceo. IIoe. — " I hate the profane 

vulgar, and I spurn them." 
Odi purrulos preecdei ingtnio. Cic. and Apul. — "I hate 

vour bits of boys of precocious talent." 
Odia in longum jaciens, qum recondPret, auctdque promrret. 

Tacit. — "Treasuring hatred, to be long stored up, and 

brought forward with an increase of virulence." This, as 

Junius remarks, is a description of the worst of charac- 
ters. 
Odia qui riimium timet, regnare nescit. Sen. — " He who too 

much fears hatred, is unfit to reign." 
Odlmus accipitrem quia semper vivit in armis. Ovid. — 

" We hate the hawk because he always lives in a state of 

warfare." This line was held to apply not inaptly to the 

first emperor Napoleon. 
Odiosa est ordtio, cum rem agas, longinquum loqui. Plalt. 

— "It is a tiresome way of speaking, when you should 

despatch the business, to be beating about the bush." 
Odium effugrre est triumphdre. — "To escape hatred is to 

gain a triumph." 
Odium iheologicum. — "Theological hatred." A hatred of 

the bitterest kind, engendered by differences on theo- 
logical points. See Nulla discordia, &c. 
Odora canum vis. Virg. — "The sharp scent of the 

hounds." 
Officii aduldtio veritdti. Tac. — "Flattery is hurtful to truth." 
Ohe ! 

Jam satis est. Hob. 

— " Hold, there is now enough." An expression used to 

signify satiety. 
Oleo tranquillior. Prov. — "More smooth than oil." Oil 

poured on water in agitation renders the surface smooth 

and placid. 



OLE— OMN. 305 

Olet lucernam. Prov. — "It smells of the lamp." Said of 
any mental production that bears the marks of mid- 
night study. The phrase was especially applied to the 
orations of Demosthenes. 

■ Oleum aide camino. Hoe. — " Add oil to the fire." To 

add fuel to flame, or as we say, " To let the fat in the 
fire." 

Oleum et operam perdere. Prov. — " To lose one's oil and 
pains." This may allude either to the oil of the midnight 
lamp, or that with which the candidates at the public 
games anointed themselves. 

Olim meminisse juvdbit. Vieg. — " It will one day be 

pleasing to remember these sufferings." See Forsan et, &c. 

Ollce amicitia. — "Platter-friendship." Cupboard love. See 
Pervet olla, &c. 

Orriina sunt illiquid. Ovid. — " There is something in omens." 

Omne actum ab agentis intentione judicandum. Law Max.— 
"Every act is to be judged of by the intention of the 
agent." In all legal inquiries the main object is to ascer- 
tain the animus or intention of the agent. 

Omne animal seipsum dlllgit. Cic. — " Everv animal lovea 
itself." 

Omne atumi vitium tanto conspectius in se 

Crimen habet, quanto major qui peccat habetnr. Juv. 
— " Every fault of the mind becomes the more conspicuous 
and more culpable, the higher the rank of the person who 
is guilty." 

Omne capax movet urna nomen. Hoe. — " The capacious urn 
[of death] sends forth every name in turn." Comparing 
death to a lottery, each name is drawn from his urn in its 
turn. See Omnes eodem, &c. 

Omne corpus mutablle est ; ita efflcitur ut omne corpus mortdle 
sit. Cic. — " Every body is subject to change ; hence it is 
that every body is mortal." 

Omne Ppigramma sit instar apis, aeuleus illi, 

Sint sua mella, sit et corporis exigui. Maet. 

" Three things must Epigrams, like bees, have all, 
A sting, and honey, and a body small." 

Omne ignotum pro magnljico est. Tac. — " Everything un- 
known is taken for magnificent." We are apt to magnify 
things that are mysterious in themselves or only seen 



30G ->MN. 

from a distance. It is sometimes quoted "pro mirifico" 
"as marvellous." 

Omne in prcecipiti vitium stetit. Jut. — "Every vice 

lias reached its climax." 

Omne malum nascens facile opprimitur : inveteratum fit ple- 
rumque robustius. CiO. — "Every evil at its birth is easily 
rooted out ; when grown old, it mostly becomes stronger." 
See Principiis obsta, &c. 

Omne nimium verfdur in vitium. Prov. — " Every excess be- 
comes a vice." 

Omne solum forti patria est. Ovid. — " To the resolute man 
every soil is his country." A stout heart will support us 
even in exile. 

Omne supervacuum pleno de pectore manat. Hoit. — " Every 
thing superfluous overflows from a full bosom." A hint 
to poets not to overload their poems with unnecessary 
descriptions, or rambling digressions. 

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci, 

Lectorem delectando pdriterque monendo. Hoe. 

— " He has carried every point who has blended the useful 

with the agreeable, amusing his reader while he instructs 

him." 

Omne vafer vitium ridenti Flaccus am'ico 
Tangit, et admissus circum pracordia ludit, 
Callidus excusso populum suspendere naso. Pebs. 
— " The subtle Flaccus touches every failing of his smil- 
ing friend, and once admitted sports around his heart; 
well-skilled in sneering at the public with upturned nose." 
Said with reference to the satire of Horace. 

Omne vovemus 

Hoc tibi ; ne tanto careat mihi nomine charta. Tibull. 
— " All this I dedicate to thee ; that this my book may 
not be deprived of a name so great as thine." 

Omnem crede diem tibi diluxisse supremum. Hoe. — " Believe 
that each day that shines is your last." In the words of 
the Morning Hymn, " Live this day as if the last." 

Omnem movere lapidem. Prov. — "To leave no stone un- 
turned." 

Omnem, qua nunc obducta tuenti 
Mortdles hP.betat visus tibi, et humida circum 
Callgat, nubem eripiam.- Visa. 



OMN. 307 

— " I will dissipate every cloud which now, intercepting the 
view, bedims your mortal sight and spreads a humid veil 
of mist around you." 

Omnes amicitias familidritdtesque qfflixit. Stteton. — " He 
has violated all the ties of friendship and of intimacy." 

Omnes amicos habere operbsum est; satis est inimwos non 
habere. Sen. — " It is an arduous task to make all men 
your friends ; it is enough to have no enemies." 

Omnes attrdhens ut magnes lapis. Prov. — " Attracting all to 
himself, like a loadstone." Said of a person of a concilia- 
tory and winning disposition. 

Omnes autem et habentur et dicuntur tyranni, qui potestdte 
sunt perpetud, in ed civitdte quee libertdte usa est. Coirv. 
Nepos. — " All men are considered and called tyrants who 
possess themselves of perpetual power in a state which 
lias before enjoyed liberty." 

Omnes bonos bonasque accurdre addecet 
Suspicionem et culpam ut ab se seqrPgent. Plaitt. 
— " It becomes all good men and good women to be care- 
ful and keep suspicion and guilt away from themselves." 

Omnes composui. Hor. — " I have buried them all." My 
relations are all gone to their repose. 

Omnes, cum secundce res sunt maxime, turn maxime 
Meditdri secum oportet, quo pacto advorsam eerumnamferant. 

Tee. 
— " When their fortunes are the most prosperous it is 
then most especially the duty of all men to reflect with- 
in themselves how they are to endure adversity." Cicero 
quotes this passage in the Third Book of his Tusculan 
Questions, and the maxim here inculcated was a favourite 
one with the Stoic philosophers. 

Omnes eddem cbgimur ; omnium 
Versdtur urnd, serius, ociiis, 

Sors exitura. Hoe. 

— " We are all impelled onward alike ; the urn of death 
is shaken for all, and sooner or later the lot must come 
forth." See Omne capax, &c. 

Omnes homines, qui de rebus dubiis consultant, ab odio, ami- 

eitid, ird, atque misericordid vacuos esse decet. Sale. — " It 

is proper that all men, who consult on doubtful matters, 

should be unbiassed by hatred, friendship, anger, and pity." 

x « 



308 OMN. 

Omnes in mal'irum mari navigdmus. — " We are all embarked 

on a sea of woes." 
Omnes insan'ire. Hon. — " That all men are mad." The 

doctrine of Licinius Damasippus, the Stoic philosopher, 

satirized by Horace : b. i. Sat. 3. 
Omnes omnium caritdtes p atria una complectltur. Cic. — 

M Out country comprehends all the affections of life." 
Omnes pari sorte nasclmur, sold virtvte distiixjuninir. — "All 

men are equal by birth, we become distinguished by merit 

alone." 
Omnes quibus res sunt minus secundee, magis sunt nescio quo- 
modo 

Suspiciosi ; ad contumrliam omnia accipiunt magis ; 

Propter suam impotentiam se credunt negVigi. Tek. 

— " All who are in distressed circumstances are suspicious, 

to I know not what degree ; they take everything too 

readily as an affront, and fancy themselves neglected on 

account of their helpless condition." 
Omnes sapientes decet conferre et fabuldri. Plaut. — " It 

behoves all prudent persons to confer and discourse to- 
gether." 
Omnes sibi melius esse malunt quam altffri. Tee. — "All would 

rather it went well with themselves than with another." 
Omnes una manet nox, 

Et calcanda semel via leihi. Hob. 

— " The same night awaits us all, and the road of death 

must once be travelled by us." 
Omnes ut tecum mtritis pro tdlibus annos 

Exigat, et pulchrd faciat te prole parentem. VlRG. 

— " That with thee, for such thy merits, she may pass all 

her years, and make thee sire of a beauteous offspring." 
Omni cetdti mors est communis. Cic. — " Death is common 

to every age." 
Omni exceptibne major. — " A man beyond all exception." 
Omni malo puriico inest granum putre. Prov. — " Every 

pomegranate has its rotten pip." So our proverb, " Every 

rose has its thorns." 
Omni persondrum delectu et discrlmme remoto. Cic. — " All 

- a si)ect or partiality for persons being laid aside." 
Omnia bene, sine poena, tempus est ludendi, 

j.bsque mora venit hora libros deponendi. 



OMN. 300 

** All things go well, the hour for play, 
No fear of rod, so books away." 
A favourite rhyme with school-boys. 

Omnia bonos vivos decent. JProv. — " All things are becoming 
to good men." A favourable construction is put upon all 
they do. 

Omnia Castor emit, sic Jiet ut omnia vendat. Martial. — 
" Castor is buying everything, it will so happen that he 
will have to sell everything." The probable fate of a 
greedy buyer. 

Omnia conando docilis solertia vincit. Manil. — " By endea- 
vour, a pliant and industrious disposition surmounts every 
difficulty." 

Omnia cum amlco dellbera, sed de te ipso prius. Sen. — " Con- 
sult your friend on everything, but first of all about your- 
self." 

Omnia ejusdem farlnce. Prov. — " All things are of the same 
grain." There is no mark of distinction in the eyes of 
Providence. 

Omnia fanda nefanda, malo per mista furore, 

Justiftcam nobis mentem averUre deorum. Catull. 

— " The confusion of all right and wrong, in this accursed 

war, has turned from us the gracious favour of the gods." 

Omnia fert cetas, animum quoque. Virg. — " Age bears 

away all things, the mental powers even." 

Omnia fert cetas secum, aufert omnia secum ; 
Omnia tempus habent, omnia tempus habet. 
— " Age brings all things with it, and carries all things 
away. All things have time, time has all things." 

■ Omnia Greece ! 

Cum sit turpe magis nostris nesc'ire Latlne. Juv. 
— " All things must be Greek ! when it is more disgraceful 
for us Romans to be ignorant of Latin." A sarcasm on 
those who study foreign languages, without being masters 
of their own. 

Omnia idem pulvis. JProv. — " All things are dust alike," 
or " of the same mould." 

Omnia inconsulti impetus ccepta, initiis vallda, spatio langues- 
cunt. Tacitus. — " The undertakings of inconsiderate im- 
pulse are full of vigour at the outset, but soon wither." 



810 o:mn. 

Omnia jam fient ', fiPri qu<e posse negabam : 

Et nihil est de quo non sit habenda fides. Otid. 
— " All thinga shall now come to pass which I used to say 
could not come to pass ; and there is nothing which is not 
deserving of belief." 

Omnia mala exempla bonis princlpiis orta sunt. — " All bad 
precedents have had their rise in good beginnings." 

Omnia mea mecwn porto. — " I carry all my property about 
me." The words of Simonides at the time of his ship- 
wreck, in allusion to his mental acquirements ; also of 
Bias, one of the Seven "Wise Men. 

Omnia munda mundis. — " To the pure all things are pure." 

Omnia mutanfur, nihil inte"rit. Ovid. — " All thinga are 

ever changing, nothing comes to an end." The doctrine 
of Pythagoras. 

Omnia mutantur, nos et mutdmur in illis. Bobbonius. — 
"All things are subject to change, and we change with 
them." This hackneyed bine is generally quoted as "Tem- 
pora mutantur" <fec. 

Omnia non parlter rerum sunt omnibus apta. Pbopebt. — 
" All things are not equally fit for all men." 

Omnia orta Occident. Sall. — " All created things shall per- 
ish." 

Omnia patefacienda, ut nihil quod venditor norit emptor igno- 
ret. Cic. — " Everything should be disclosed, that the buyer 
may be ignorant of nothing which the seller knows." 
The proper way of dealing ; and then the maxim Caveat 
emptor applies. 

Omnia perdldlmus. Tantummodo vita relicta est. Ovid. — 
" We have lost everything. Life alone is left." 

Omnia perversas possunt corrumpPre mentes. OviD. — " All 
things can lead astray perverted minds." 

Omnia pontus erant, dePrant quoque littora ponto ; 
Nat lupus inter oves, fulvos vehit unda leones. Ovid. 
— " It was all ocean, and to that ocean shores were want- 
ing — the wolf swims among the sheep, the wave carries 
along the tawny lions." Ovid's description of the Deluge. 

Omnia prcecepi, atque anlmo mecum ante peregi. Vibg. — " I 
have anticipated all things, and have acted them over al- 
ready in my mind." 



OJO. 311 

Omnia prcesumuntur legitime facta donee probP.tur in contra- 
rium. Coke. — " All things are presumed to be lawfully 
done, until it is proved to the contrary." 

Omnia prius verbis exper'iri, quam armis, sapientem decet. Teb. 
— " It becomes a wise man to try everything that can be 
done by words, before he has recourse to arms." 

Omnia prof ectb, cum se a ccelestibus rebus rPferet ad humdnas, 
excelsius magnificentiusque et dicet et sentiet. Cic. — 
" When a man turns his attention from heavenly things 
to human affairs, he will assuredly be able to speak and to 
think on all subjects on a more sublime and a more ele- 
vated scale." 

Omnia quae nunc vetustissima creduntur nova fuere ; et quod 
hodie exemplis tuemur inter exempla erit. Tacit. — " All 
things which are now believed to be of the greatest anti- 
quity were once new ; and what we now defend by ex- 
ample will one day be quoted as an example." 

Omnia quae sensu volvuntur vota diurno 

Pectore soplto reddit arnica quies. Claud. 

— " Kindly repose restores to the slumbering breast all 

the thoughts that are revolved in our mind during the 

da 7-" ... 

Omnia risus, omnia pulvis, et omnia nil sunt. — " All things 
are ridiculous, all things are as dust, and all things are aa 
nothing." 

Omnia Romce 

Cum pretio. Juv. 

— " All things at Borne are coupled with high price." 

Omnia si perdas, famam servdre memento ; 
Qua semel amissd postea nullus eris. 

— " Though you should lose everything else, remember to 
preserve your good name, which once lost, you will be un- 
done." 

Omnia subjecisti sub pedtbus, oves et boves. — " Beneath our 
feet Thou hast placed everything, both sheep and oxen." 
Motto of the Butchers' Company. 

Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo ; 

El siiblto casu, quae valuere, ruunt. Ovid. 

— " All things belonging to man are hanging from a slen- 
der thread ; and that which was firm before falls headlcng 
with a sudden descent." 



312 OMN. 

Omnia tu/a timnis. Vino. — " Fearful of everything, 

even where there is safety." The state of a mind which 
has heen harassed by dangers and anxietieB. 

Omnia vendha Romce. Prov — " All things are to be bought 
at Rome." Said of Koine in the days of her corruption. 

Omnia vincit amor, nos et ceddmus amdri. Vibo. — " Love 
conquers all things, let us too yield to love." " Love rules 
the court, the camp, the grove." 

Omnibus bonis expPdit rempubllcam esse salvam. ClC. — " It 
is the interest of every good man that his country shall be 
safe." 

Omnibus hoc vitium est cantbribus, inter am'tcos 
TJt nunquam indicant animum cantdre rogdti, 

Injussi nunquam desistant. Hob. 

— " This is a fault common to all singers, that among their 
friends when asked to sing they never will bring their 
minds to comply, but when not requested they will never 
leave off." See Novi ingenium, &c. 

Omnibus hostes 
Seddite nos popiilis, civile avertite bellum. Ltjcan. 
— " Make us the enemies of every nation, avert from us 
civil war." Any bloodshed is preferable to that of citizens 
by the hands of citizens. 

Omnibus in terris, qua sunt a Oddlbus usque 
Auroram et Gangem, pauci dignoscPre possunt 
Vera bona, atque Mis multiim diversa, rembtd 

Erroris nebiild. Jtjv. 

— " In all the lands which lie from Gades even to the 
land of the morn and the Ganges, few are able to re- 
move the clouds of prejudice, and to discern those things 
which are really for their good, and those which are 
directly the contrary." 

Omnibus invideas, Zoile, nemo tibi. Mart. — " You envy every- 
one, Zoilus, no one envies you." Said to a sarcastic but 
contemptible writer. 

Omnibus modis, qui pauperes sunt homines, rnisori vivunt ; 
JPrasertim quibus nee qucestus est, nee didicitre artem ullam. 

Plaut. 
— "Those who are poor live wretchedly in every way; 
especially those who have no calling and have learned no 
pursuit." 



OMN. 313 

Omnibus nobis ut res dant sese, ita magni atque humiles swnus. 
Tee. — " Just as matters befall us, so are we all elated or 
depressed." 

Omnis ars imitdtio est naturae. Sen". — " All art is an imita- 
tion of nature." 

Omnis commdditas sua fert incommoda secum. — " Every con- 
venience has its own inconveniences." 

Omnis doctrines ac scientice thesaurus altissimus. — "A most 
copious repository of every kind of learning and science." 

Omnis dolor aut est vehPmens, aut levis ; si levis, facile fertur, 
si vehemens, certe brevis futiirus est. Cic. — " All pain ia 
either severe or moderate ; if moderate it will be easily en- 
dured; if severe it will at least be short-lived." 

Omnis enim res, 

Virtus, fama, decus, divina humdndque, pulchris 

Divitiis parent. Hon. 

— " For all things divine and human, virtue, fame, and 
honour, obey the influence of alluring wealth." Said in 
reference to the venality of Rome. 

Omnis fama a domesticis emdnat. Prov. — " All fame eman- 
ates from our servants." They are the first to teach the 
world how to estimate us, according to the character which 
we receive from them. But in spite of this it is a saying 
that " No man is a hero to his valet." 

Omnis poena corpordlis, quamvis minima, major est omni poena 
pecunidrid, quamvis maxima. Law Max. — "The very 
slightest corporal punishment falls more heavily than the 
most weighty pecuniary penalty." Because there is a 
disgrace attached to the one which does not result from 
the other. 

Omnium consensu capax imperii, nisi imperdsset. Tacit 
— " By the consent of all, fit to govern had he never 
ruled." Said of the Emperor Galba, who did not answer 
the expectations which had been previously formed of 
him. 

Omnium hordrum homo. Quintill. — " A man ready at 
all hours." 

Omnium pestium pestilentissima est superstitio. — " Of all pests 
the greatest pest is superstition." 

Omnium quce dixerat feceratque, arte quddam ostentdtor. 
Tacit. — " One who set off everything that he said and did 



3U OMX-OPI. 

with a certain skill." Said of Licinius Mueianus, tho 
consul. 

Omnium rerum ex quibus aliquid acqu'trltur, nihil rst agricul- 
turd mUius, nihil ubPrius, nihil homine I'tbPro dignius. ClC. 
— " Of all the pursuits by which anything is acquired, 
there is nothing preferable to agriculture, nothing more 
productive, nothing more worthy the attention of a man 
of liberal education." 

Omnium rerum, heus ! vicissitudo. Tee. — "Hark you! 

there are changes in all things." 

Omnium rerum principia parva sunt. ClC. — "The begin- 
nings of all things are small." 

Omnium rerum quorum usus est potest esse abusus, virtute sold 
exceptd. Law Max. — " Of all things of which there is a 
use there may be an abuse, virtue alone excepted." 

Omnium rerum vicissiiiido est. Tee. — " Everything is liable 
to change." 

Onus probandi. — "The burden of proving." A responsibility 
which by our law lies on the person making the charge. 

Onus segni impone asello. — " Lay the burden on the slow- 
paced ass." 

Opemferre in tempore. — "To bring aid in time." To show 
oneself a friend in need. 

Operce pretium est. — "'Tis worth your while." It is worth 
attending to. 

OpZre in longo fas est obrepere somnum. Hob. — " In a 

long work we must expect sleep to steal upon us." We 
must naturally expect mistakes in a work of any magnitude. 
See Quandoque bonus, &c. 

Operbse nihil agunt. Sen. — " They take great pains in doing 
nothing." They make much ado about nothing. 

Opes inv'isae mertto sunt forti viro, 

Quia dives area veram laudem interoipit. Ph.s;d. 
— " Biches are deservedly despised by a man of worth, be- 
cause a well-stored chest intercepts genuine praise." 

Opinionum commenta delet dies, natural judicia confirmat. Cic. 
— ■" Time effaces speculative opinions, but confirms the judg- 
ments of nature." Speculative opinions are but short- 
lived, while theories founded upon nature are immutably 
upheld. 
Oplnor, 



OPO-OPT. 315 

K<ec res et jungit, junctos et servat, amicot. 
At nos virtutes ipsas invertimus, atque 

Sincerum cuplmus vas incrustdre. Hob. 

— " This method, in my opinion, both unites friends, and 
keeps them so united. But we invent the very virtues 
themselves, and are desirous of soiling the untainted ves- 
sel." Horace alludes to the practice of not making al- 
lowance for the failings of our friends. 

Oportet testudinis carries aut edere aut non Mere. JProv. — 
" You must either eat the flesh of turtle, or not eat it." 
Either do a thing well or don't do it at all. " There is 
no mincing the matter." The flesh of the turtle eaten 
sparingly was said to be hard of digestion, but, if taken 
plentifully, to be extremely wholesome. 

Opprobrium medicbrum. — "The disgrace of the physicians." 
Any incurable disorder. 

Optandum est ut ii qui prcesunt reipubticce legum similes 
sint, qucB ad puniendum non iracundid, sed cequitdte ducun- 
tur. Cic. — " It were to be wished that they who are set 
over the republic should be like the laws, which, in inflict- 
ing punishment, are influenced not by anger but by 
justice." 

Optat ephippia bos, piger optat ardre caballus. Hoe. — " The 
ox wishes for the horse's trappings, the lazy nag wishes to 
plough." Pew are content with the station in which 
Providence has placed them. 

Optima quceque dies mlsPris mortdlibus cevi 
Prima fugit ; subeunt morbi tristisque senectus, 
Et labor ; et durce rapit inclementia mortis. VlBG. 
— " Each best day of life flies fast away for wretched 
mortals ; diseases succeed, and morose old age, and pain ; 
and the inclemency of inexorable death tears us away." 

Opfimi consilidrii mortui. Prov. — " The best counsellors 
are the dead." 

Optimum cibi condimentum fames, sitis potus. — "The best 
seasoning for food is hunger, for drink, thirst." An 
aphorism of Socrates quoted by Cicero. 

Optimum custodem ovium quern dicam esse lupum ! — " What 
a pretty shepherd a wolf would make!" 

Optimum ellge, suave et facile Mud fdciet consuetudo. — 
" Choose what is best ; habit will soon render it agreeable 



316 OPT— OS. 

and easy." A saying of Pythagoras, translated from 
Plutarch by Lord Bacon. 

Optimum est aliend frui insdnid. Cato. — " It is the best 
plan to profit by the folly of otln 

Optimum est non nasci. Prov. — " Better not to be born." 
We should then escape "the thousand ills that flesh is 
heir to." 

Optimum obsonium labor. Prov. — " Labour is the best food," 
or as we say, "Hunger is the best sauce." 

Optimus illefuit vindex, ladentia pectus 

Vincula qui rilpit, dtdoluitquc sc/nel. OviD. 
— " He is the best asserter of his liberties who bursts the 
chain that galls his breast, and at the same moment ceases 
to grieve." 

Opum furidta cup'ido. Ovid. — "An ungovernable pas- 
sion for wealth." 

Opusoplficemprobat. Prov. — "Thework provestheworknuin." 

Orandum est ut sit mens sana in corpure sano. Juv. — " We 
should pray for a healthy mind in a healthy body." 

Orate pro dnlmd. — "Pray for the soul of." The ordinary 
commencement of mediaeval epitaphs. 

Oratiunis summa virtus est perspicuitas. Quint. — "The 
greatest excellency of oratory is perspicuity." 

Orator imprubus leges subvertit. — " An evil-minded orator 
subverts the laws." He uses the arts of persuasion to a 
bad purpose, by prevailing on others to disregard the laws. 

Orci habet gdleam. Prov. — " He has the helmet of Pluto." 
Said of persons who incite others to crime without ap- 
pearing themselves to be accomplices. The helmet of 
Pluto was said to render the wearer invisible. 

Or dine gentis 

Mores, et studia, et popiilos, et proslia dicam. Vieg. 

— "I will in their proper order relate the manners and 

pursuits, the tribes and the battles of the race." 

Ore tenus. Law Term. — " From the mouth." By word of 
mouth. His testimony was ore tenus, " by parole," in 
contradistinction to written evidence. 

Ornamentum Jlgurdrum ad elegantiam verborum adjungP.re. 
Cic. — " To unite figurative embellishment with elegance 
of language." 

Os dignum aterno mtidum quod fulgeat auro, 



OS— OTI. 317 

Si mallet lauddre Deum ; cut sordlda monstra 
Prcetiilit, et liquldam temerdvit crlmine vocem. Peud, 
— " Features so beauteous that they had been worthy to 
shine in everlasting gold, if he had chosen rather to praise 
our God ; to whom he preferred foul monsters, and defiled 
his fluent language with obscenity." 

Os hebes est, posit&que movent fastidia mensce ; 

Et queror, invtsi cum venit hora cibi. Ovid. 

— " My appetite is blunted, food set before me creates 
loathing; and I complain when the hour comes for my 
hated repast." 

Os hormni sublime dedit ccelumque Uteri. Otid. — " To man 
[God] gave a countenance to look on high and to behold 
the heavens." 

Oscitante uno deinde oscitat et alter. — " When one yawns, 
another yawns too." A saying of the middle ages, the 
truth of which most persons know by experience. 

Ostrbque insignis et auro 

Stat sdnipes, acfrcena ferox spumantia mandit. VlEG. 
— " Splendidly caparisoned in purple and gold, her courser 
stands, and impatient champs the froth-covered bit." A 
description of Dido's steed. 

Otia corpus alunt, animus quoque pascttur illis ; 
Immddlcus contra carpit utrumque labor. Ovid. 
— " Relaxation strengthens the body and invigorates the 
mind ; while immoderate fatigue exhausts both." 

Otia securis invidiosa nocent. — " Idleness, so much envied, 
injures those who are self-confident." 

Otia si tollas, periere Oupidinis arcus, 

Contempt&que jacent et sine luce faces. Ovid. 
— " Take away the temptations of idleness, and Cupid's 
bow is useless : his torches lie neglected and without their 
light." The mind that is immersed in business has no 
time to think of love. See Quceritis JEgisihus, &c. 

Otiosa sedftlitas. — " Idle industry." Laborious trifling. 

Otiosis nullus adsistit Deus. Prov. — " No deity assists the 
idle." " Help yourself, and God will help you." 

Otiosus animus nescit quid volet. — " The unemployed mind 
knows not what it wants." 

Otium cum dignitate. — " Leisure with dignity." Applied to 
a man who is living in the retirement earned by his worth. 



318 OTT— PAC. 

Otium divos rogat in patenti 

Prensus JEgceo, simul atra nubes 

Condldit lunam, neque certa fulgent 

Sldera nautis. Hob. 

— " He that is overtaken in the wide ^Egean, when black 

clouds have obscured the moon and not a star shines with 

its steady light for mariners, supplicates the gods for re- 
pose." 
Otium multa mala adolescentes docet. — "Idleness teaches 

the young many vices." 
Otium naufragium castitdtis. — " Idleness is the shipwreck of 

chastity." See Qu<eritis JEqisthw, Ac. 
Otium omnia vitia parit. — " idleness produces every vice." 

" Idleness is the mother of all evil." 
Otium sine dignitdte. — " Leisure without dignity." A vulgar 

arrogant man in retirement. 
Otium sine Uteris mors est, et homlnis vivi sepultura. Sen. 

— " Leisure without literary resources is death, and the 

entombment of a man alive." 
Otium umbrdttle. — " Ease in retirement," or, " in the shade." 
Ovem lupo committere. Prov. — " To intrust the sheep to the 

wolf." To leave unprotected persons to the mercy of the 

rapacious. 



P. 

P. B. for Post Diluvium.— 11 After the flood." 

P. M. for Post Meridiem. — " After mid-day" — " afternoon.' 

P. S. for Post Scriptum. — " After- written " — a postscript. 

Pabulum Acherontis. Plaut. — " Food for Acheron." An 
old man at the very verge of the grave. Acheron was a 
river, according to Grecian mythology, in the infernal re- 
gions. 

Pace tanti viri. — "With the leave of so great a man." 
Sometimes said ironically. 

Pacem hominibus habe, bellum cum vitiis. — " Be at peace 
with men, at war with vices." 

Pacta conventa. — " Conditions agreed upon." A diplomatic 
phrase used to describe terms that have been agreed on 
between two powers. 



PAL— PAK. 319 

Palam mutlre plebeio pidcidum est. — "It is a dangerous 
thing for a man of humble birth to mutter in public" 
Quoted by Phaedrus from the Telephus of Ennius. 

Palindromicus, or Sotadicus versus. — See Poma tibi, &c. 

Palinodiam cdnere. — "To make one's recantation." "To 
eat one's words." The poet Stesichorus, having in an ode 
censured Helen, was deprived of his sight by the gods ; 
upon which, in another ode which he called his Palinodia, 
he made his recantation by extolling her as highly as he 
had censured her before ; whereupon he regained his 
sight. 

Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas, 
Pegumque turres. O bedte Seccti, 

Vita summa brevis spem nos vetat inchodre longam. Hoe, 
— " Pale death with impartial foot knocks at the cottages 
of the poor, and the palaces of kings. happy Sextius ! 
the short sum total of life forbids us to form remote ex- 
pectations." 

Pallor in ore sedet ; macies in corpore toto : 
Nusquam recta acies: livent rubigine denies: 
Pectora felle virent : lingua est suffusa veneno : 

Pisus abest. Ovid. 

— " Paleness rests upon her countenance, and leanness in 
all her body ; she never looks direct on you ; her teeth 
are black with rust ; her breast is green with gall ; her 
tongue is dripping with venom ; smiles there are none." 
A beautiful description of Envy. 

Palmam qui meruit ferat. — " Let him who has deserved the 
palm bear it." The motto assigned to Nelson. It is de- 
rived from Dr. Jortin's Lusus Poetici. 

Par bene compardtum. — " A pair well matched." 

Par negotiis neque supra. Tacit. — " Equal to, but not 
above, his business." Said of a person whose talents fit 
him exactly for his situation. 

Par nobtle fratrum. Hob. — " A noble pair of brothers." 
Used ironically, to denote two associates well suited to 
each other. 

Par pari reftro. — " I return like for like." I give " tit for 
tat," — " a rowland for an oliver." 

Parasiticam coenam quasrit. — " He seeks the meal of a para- 
site." In the character of a sponger. 



320 PAR. 

JParce, puer, st/mulis, et fortius utere loris. Ovid. — " Boy, 
spare the whip, and firmly grasp the reins." 

Parcendum est ariimo miserdblle minus habenti. Ovid. — " We 
must make allowance for the mind that hears the wound 
of sorrow." 

ParcPre persunis, dlcere de vitiis. Ma.rt. — " To spare per- 
sons, to speak of vices." Advice to a satirist. 

Parcere subjectis, et debelldre superbos. Vino. — " To spare 
the conquered, and to pull down the haughty." This 
maxim was adopted by 1 ranee in the time of the first Re- 
volution. 

Parcimonia est scientia vitandi sumptus supervacuos, aut ars 
re familiari moderate utendi. Sen. — " Frugality is the 
science of avoiding superfluous expenses, or the art of 
using our means with moderation." 

Parcit 

Cogndiis maculis simllis fera. Jut. 

— "The beast of like kind will spare those of kindred 
spots." 

Parctte paucdrum diJfundPre crimen in omnes. Otid. — " For- 
bear to lay the culpability of the few upon the many." 

Parous Deurum cultor, et infrequens, 
Insanientis dum sapiential 
Consultus erro ; nunc retrorsum 
Vela dare, atque iterdre cursus 

Cogor relictos. Hob. 

— " A thrifty and irregular worshipper of the gods, while 
I professed the errors of a senseless philosophy, I am now 
obliged to set sail back again, and to renew the course that 
I had deserted." The confession made by Horace on 
abandoning the tenets of the Epicureans. 

Pares cum paribus (ut est in vetfri proverbio) facilltme congre- 
gantur. Cic. — " To use the old proverb, ' Like most readily 
associates with like.' " " Birds of a feather," &c. 

Pari passu. — " "With equal steps." Neck and neck. 

Pari ratione. — "By similar reasoning." For a like cause. 

Paribus sententiis reus absolvitur. Coke. — "Where the 
opinions are equally divided the accixsed is acquitted." 

Pdritur pax bello. Cobn. Nep. — " Peace is the result of 
war." Peace is also insured by showing that we are pre- 
pared for war. 



PAft. 321 

Pars adaperta fuit, pars altera clausa fenestra? : 

Quale fere sylvan lumen habere solent. Ovid. 

— " A part of the window was thrown open ; the other 
part shut ; the light was just such as the woods are wont 
to have." 

Pars beniflcii est quod petitur si belle neges. Syr. — " To 
refuse graciously, is half to grant a favour." 

Pars bmeficii est quod petitur si citb neges. Syr. — " To 
refuse quickly, is half to grant a favour." 

Pars homtnum vitiis gaudet constanter, et urget 

Proposltum ; pars multa natat, modo recta capessens, 

Interdum pravis obnoxia. Hor. 

— " A portion of mankind constantly glory in their vices, 
and pursue their purpose ; a great portion fluctuate, some- 
times practising what is right, sometimes giving way to 
what is wrong." 

> Pars minima est ipsa puella sui. Ovid. — " The girl her- 
self is the least valuable part of herself." Her portion is 
better worth having than herself. 

Pars minima sui. — " The smallest remains of himself," or 
" itself." " The wreck of his former self.' ' 

Pars pede, pars etiam celeri decurrlte cymbd. Ovid. — " Some 
of you go on foot, some run down the stream in the rapid 
skiff." An appropriate address to the spectators of a boat- 
race. 

Pars sanitdtis velle sandrifuit. Sen. — " It is a part of the 
cure to wish to be cured." 

Pars tui melior immortdlis est. Sen. — " Your better part is 
immortal." 

Parthis menddcior. Hor. — " More lying than the Parthians." 
The Parthians were looked upon by the Romans as pecu- 
liarly faithless, and in that respect occupied the same 
place in their estimation that the Carthaginians had for- 
merly done. 

Partlbus locdre. — "To let land, going halves in the crop," 
instead of rent. 

Partlceps crlmlnis. — "A partaker in the crime." An acces- 
sory either before or after the fact. 

Partitriunt montes, nascetur rldlciilus mus. Hor. — " The 
mountains are in labour, a silly mouse will be produced." 
An application of the fab]e of the Mountain in Labour, to 



322 PAR— ?AT. 

an author whoso pompous pretences end in little or no- 
thing. 
Parva leves capiunt dnlmos. Ovid. — " Trifles captivate 

weak minds." "Little things please little minds." 
■ Parvis componPre magna. Yihq. — " To compare 

great things with small." 
Parviila, pumllio, \apiTb>v pia, tota, merum gal. Luck. — " A 

little, tiny, pretty, witty, charming, darling die." 
Parviila scintilla sape magnum suscitnit inmiaium.— " A 

tiny spark has often kindled a great conflagration." 
Parvum addas parvo, magnus acervus erit. — " Add little to 

little, and there will be a large heap." See De multis, &c, 

and Multi si, &c. 
Parvum, non parva? amicitice, pignut. — " A little pledge of no 

little friendship." A motto for a gift t<> ■ mend. 
Parvum parva decent. Hon. — " Small things best suit 

the small." 
Pascitur in vivis livor, post fata quiescit ; 

Tunc suns, ex merlto, quemque tuitur honos. Ovid. 

— " Envy feeds upon the living, after death it is at rest ; 

then a man's deserved honours protect him." The world 

seldom does justice to living merit. 
Passibus ambiguis Fortuna volubtlis errat, 

Pit manet in nullo certa tenaxque loco. Ovid. 

— " Fleeting fortune wanders with doubting steps, remain- 
ing in no one place for certain and to be relied upon." 
Paterfamilias. — " The father of a family." 
Pater ipse colendi 

HaudfacUem esse viam voluit, primusque per art em 

Movit agros, curis acucns mortfdia corda. Vieg. 

— " The Father himself did not ordain the ways of tillage 

to be easy ; he first, by art, aroused the soil, whetting the 

skill of mortals by care." 
Pater noster. — " Our Father." The Lord's Prayer, from its 

commencing words, is so called. 
Pater patriae. — " The father of his country." 
Pati necesse est multa mortdlem mala. N^svirs. — " Man 

must of necessity suffer many evils." " Man is born to 

trouble as sparks fly upwards." Job v. 7. 
Pati 

Nos oportet quod illefaciat cujus potestas plus potest. Plaut. 



PAT— PATT. 323 

— " It befits us to submit to what he does whose power is 
the stronger." 

Patientia Icesa Jit furor. — " Patience abused becomes fury." 
Patience must not be trespassed upon too far. 

Patientia — quce pars magna justitice est. Pliny the Younger. 
— " Patience, which is a great part of justice." 

— ■ Patitur posnas peccandi sola voluntas. Juv. — "The 
bare wish to sin incurs the penalty." See Scelus intra, 
&c. 

Putrid quis exul 

Se quoque fugit ? Hob. 

— " Who, though flying from his country, can fly from 

himself?" 

Patrice Junius igne alieno luculentior. Prov. — " The smoke 
of our own country is brighter than the fire of another." 
Though ever so homely, home is home still. Ulysses felt 
this in his wanderings, when he longed to behold the 
smoke of his native land. 

■ Patrice pietdtis imago. Virg. — " The image of filial af- 
fection." 

Patriceque impendPre vitam, 

Nee sibi, sed toti gentium se credere mundo. LlTCAN. 
— " To devote his life to his country, and to think that he 
was born, not for himself alone, but for all mankind." 
Said of Cato of Utica. The principles of a benefactor of 
mankind. 

Patrimonium non comesum sed devordtum. ClC. — " An in- 
heritance, not merely eaten, but devoured." 

Patris estjilius. Prov. — " He is his father's son." " He is 
a chip of the old block." 

Pauca abunde mediocribus sufficiunt. — " A few things suffice 
abundantly for the moderate." 

Pauca verba. — " Pew words. 

Pauci ex multis sunt amid homtni qui certi sient, PlaTTT. 
— " Out of many, there are but few friends on whom a 
man can depend." 

Pauci vident nwrbum suum, omnes amant. Prov. — " Pew see 
their own failings, all are in love -with them." 

Paucis cdrior est Jides quam peefmia. Sall. — " To few is 
good faith more valuable than money." The author is 
speaking of the declining years of the Roman republic 



324 PAU— PEC. 

Paucis temerttas est bono, mitltis malo. Ph.ed.--" Kashueaa 
brings luck to a few, misfortune to most." 

Paulum sepultee distat inertia 

Celdta virtus. Hob. 

— " Valour unsung is little better tban cowardice in the 
grave." See De non apparentibus. &c. 

Pauper enim non est cui rerum suppetit usiis. 
Si ventri bene, si lateri pedtbusque tuis, nil 
Divttiae poterunt regales addere majus. Hoe. 

— " For that man is not poor who is in the enjoyment of 
the necessaries of life. If it is well with your stomach, 
your body, and your feet, regal wealth can add no more." 

Pauper eris semper, si pauper es, ^Emilidne ; 

Dantur opes nullis nunc nisi d'lvltlbus. Mart. 

— " You will always be poor, if you are poor now, Mm\- 

lianus ; riches are given now-a-days to none but the 

wealthy." 

Pauper sum, fdteor, pdtior ; quod Di dant fero. Plaut. — 
" I am poor, I confess ; I put up with it. What the gods 
send I endure." 

Pauperis est numerdre pecus. Ovid. — " It is for a poor man 
to count his flock." 

Paupertasfiigitur, totoque arcessltur orbe. Lttcan. — " Poverty 
is shunned and persecuted throughout the world." 

Pavor est utrique molestus. Hor. — " Fear is trouble- 
some on either side." 

Pavore carent qui nihil commlserunt ; at poenam semper ob 
dculos versdri putant qui peccdrunt. — " Those are free from 
fear who have done no wrong ; but those who have sinned 
have always the dread of punishment before their eyes." 

Pax in bello. — " Peace in war." A war waged without vi- 
gour. Dr. Johnson remarks that " the king who makes 
war on his enemies tenderly, distresses his subjects most 
cruelly." 

Pax potior bello. — " Peace is preferable to war." 

Pax vobiscum. — " Peace be with you." Used in the ritual 
of the Roman Church. 

- ■ Peccdre docentes 

Fallax historias movet. Hor. 

— " The deceiver quotes stories that afford precedents for 

binning." 



PEC— PER. • 325 

Peccdvi. — " I have sinned." To "make a man cry peccavi** 
to make him acknowledge his error. 

Pectus prceceptis format amicis. Hoe. — " He influences 
the mind by the precepts of a friend." 

Pecunice fugienda cupiditas : nihil est tarn angusti dnimi tarn- 
que parvi quam amdre divitias. ClC. — " We should avoid 
the love of money : nothing so much shows a little and 
narrow mind as the love of riches." 

Pecuniae obediunt omnia. — " All things are obedient to 
money." 

Pecuniam in loco negligere interdum maximum est lucrum. 
Ter. — "To despise money on proper occasions is some- 
times the greatest gain." 

Pecuniam perdidisti ; fortasse ilia te perderet martens. — " You 
have lost your money ; perhaps, if you had kept it, it would 
have lost you." 

Pedibus timor addidit alas. Vieg. — " Pear added wings 

to his feet." 

Pendent opera interrupta.——— Vieg. — " The progress 

of the works remains interrupted." 

Pendente lite. — "The strife still pending." The trial not 
being concluded. 

Pene gemelli 

Fratemis dnimis. Hob. 

— "Almost twins in the strong resemblance of their dispo- 
sitions." 

Penltus toto divlsos orbe Pritannos. Vieg. — " The Brit- 
ons, a race almost severed from the rest of the world." 
The people of this island, as spoken of a few years alter 
the invasion by C«sar. 

Pennas inc'tdere dTicui. Prov. — " To clip a person's wings ;" 
or, as we say, " To bring him down a peg." 

Per accldens. — " Through accident." A term used to denote 
an effect not following from the nature of the thing, but 
from some extrinsic circumstance. It is opposed to per 
se, " of itself" — thus, fire burns per se, heated iron per 
accidens. 

Per annum. — " By the year." Yearly. 

Per capita. Law Phrase. — "By the head." In contradis- 
tinction to Per stirpes, which see. 

Per centum. — " By the hundred." 



32G TEK. 

Per contra. — " On the other side." By way of equivalent. 

Per diem.—" By the day." 

Per fas et nefas. — "By right or by wrong." lie pursued 
his object per fas et nefas, i. e. he left no means untried, 
disregarding all consequences, and troubled by no scruples. 

Per incuriam. — " Through carelessness." 

Per multas adltum sibi sa-pe Jiguras 

Reperit. Ovid. 

— " He often gains admission under various disguises." 

Per dbltum.—" Through the death of" 

Per quod servitium ami sit. Law Term. — " By which he lost 
his, or her, services." Words used to describe the injury 
sustained by the plaintiff by reason of the seduction of his 
daughter. 

Perrisum multumpossiscognoscerestultum. — "By much laugh- 
ter you may distinguish a fool." A mediaeval proverb. 

Per saltum. — " By a leap." A man attains high rank per 
saltum, i. e. passing over the heads of others. 

Per scelera semper scelerlbus certum est iter. Sen. — " The 
sure way to wickedness is always through wickedness." 
One crime ever leads to another. 

Per se. — "By itself," or, "For its own sake." "No man 
likes mustard per se. ,y Johnson. See Per accident. 

Per stirpes. Law Phrase. — " According to the original 
stock." See Per capita. 

Per tarttum terra, tot aquas, vix credere possim 

Indicium studii transiluisse mei. Ovio. 

— " Through such vast tracts of land, across so many seas, 
I could hardly have believed that any evidence of my pur- 
suits could make its way." 

Per testes. — " By witnesses." 

Per varum casus, per tot discrtmma rerum. Vieg. — " Through 
various hazards, through so many changes in our for- 
tunes." " Chances and changes." 

— — Peragit tranquilla potestas 

Quod violenta nequit, manddta que fortius urget 

Imperiosa quies. Claud. 

— " Power exercised with moderation can effect what by 
violence it could never have accomplished ; and calmness 
enforces, with more energy, imperial mandates." 

Peras impbsuit Jupiter nobis duos : 



PER. 327 

Propriis repletam vitiis post fergum dedit ; 

Alienis ante pectus suspendit gravem. Piled. 

— " Jupiter has loaded us with a couple of wallets : the 

one, filled with our own vices, he has placed at our backs ; 

the other, heavy with those of others, he has hung be* 

fore." See Aliena vitia, &c. 

Percunctdre a peritis. Cic. — "Make inquiries of persona 
who are skilled." Seek information from the learned. 

Percunctatorem fuglto, nam garrvlus idem est ; 

Nee refinent patiilce commissa fide 'Titer aures. Hok. 
— " Avoid an inquisitive person, for he is a babbler ; nor 
do ears which are always open faithfully retain what is 
intrusted to their keeping." 

Perdidit arma, locum virtidis deseruit, qui 

Semper in augendd festinat et obruitur re. Hor. 

— " He has lost his arms, and deserted the cause of virtue, 

who is ever eager and engrossed in increasing his wealth." 

Per difficile est, cum prcestdr'e cceteris concupieris, servdre cequi- 
tdtem. Cic. — " It is very difficult to observe justice when 
you are striving to surpass others." 

Perdis, et in damno gratia nulla tuo. Ovid. — " You lose, 
and you get no thanks for your loss." 

Perdltio tua ex te. — "Tour ruin is owing to yourself." 

Perditur Tuec inter misero lux, non sine votis. Hor. — " With 
all this, the day is wasted to unhappy me, not without 
many regrets." The poet censures the trifles which con- 
sume the day in town. 

Pereant amid, dum una inimici intercidant. Cic. — " Let our 
friends perish, provided our enemies fall with them." This 
was both a Greek and a Eoman proverb ; quoted as the 
sentiment of a calculating ungenerous man. 

Pereant illi qui ante nos nostra dixfrunt. Donatus. — " Perish 
they who have said our good things before us." The ex- 
clamation of a man who does not like to be forestalled in 
his good sayings. See Nil dictum, &c. 

PPreunt et imputantur. Mart. — " They perish, and are 
placed to our account." Said with reference to the hours. 
These words form an inscription on a clock at Exeter Ca- 
thedral, as also in the Temple, London. 

Perfer ; et invltos currPre coge pedes. Ovid. — "Persist, and 
compel your feet to hasten, however unwillingly." 



328 PER. 

Perfer et obdiira ; dolor hie tibi prodhit olitn. Ovid. — 
"Have patience and endure it; this grief will one day 
il you." 

Perfer et obdura; multo graviora tulisti. Ovid. — "Have 
putience and endure it ; you have endured much greater 
misfortunes than these." 

Perflda, sed quamvis perftda, cara tamen. TlBULL. — " Per- 
fidious, but, though thus perfidious, dear." 

Perfide ! sed duris g?nuit te cautibus horrens 

Caucasus, Hyrcanceque admorunt ubera tigres. Vino. 
— " Perfidious man ! Caucasus hath borne thee among 
its flinty rocks, and Hyrcanian tigers have given tint- 
suck." Dido's reproaches uttered against ./Eneas, when 
he resisted her attempts to dissuade him from leaving 
Carthage. 

Pergis pugnantia secum 

Frontibus cdversis componere. Hor. 

— " Tou are trying to reconcile things which are opposite 
in their natures." 

Verm ad alios ; v?nio ad alios ; deinde ad alios ; 

Una res. Plaut. 

— " I go to others, I come to others, and then to others 
again, 'tis all one." 

Per'ibo, si nonfecero ; sifaxo, vapuldvero. Plaut. — "I shall 
perish if I do it not— if I do it I shall get a drubbing." 
The horns of a dilemma. 

Periculosce plenum opus alecs. Hon. — " A work full of dan- 
gerous hazard." As precarious as the faithless dice. 

Pcriculdsior casus ab alto. Prov. — " A fall from on high 
is most dangerous." The higher the station the greater 
the fall. 

Periculdsum est credere et non credere ; 
Ergo exploranda est Veritas, multum prius 
Quam stulta prove judicet sententia. Vns,T>. 

— " It is dangerous alike to believe or to disbelieve ; 
therefore we ought to examine strictly into the truth of a 
matter, rather than suffer an erroneous impression to per- 
vert our judgment." 

Per'iculum ex aliis facito, tibi quod ex usu siet. Tek. — " Take 
warning from others of what may be to your own advan« 
tage." 



PER. 329 

Periere mores, jus, decus, pittas, fides, 

Et, qui redlrc nescit cum perit, pudor. Sen. 
— " Morals, justice, honour, piety, good faith, have perish- 
ed ; that sense too of shame, which, once destroyed, can 
never be restored." 

-—PeriPrunt tempera longi 

fiervitii. Juv. 

— " The fruits of a prolonged servitude are now lost." 

Puriissem nisi periissem. — " If I had not undergone it, I had 
been undone." A play on the meanings of the verb 
pereo. 

Perit quod facis ingrdto. Prov. — " What you do for an un- 
grateful man is thrown away." 

Periturce parcite charta. — " Spare the paper which is doomed 
to perish." An appeal to the kind feeling of the reader, 
by the author of a work of a light and ephemeral nature. 
Adapted from Juvenal. 

Perjuria ridet amantum. Ovid. — " He laughs at the 

perjuries of lovers." Ovid says this of Jupiter, who calls 
to mind his own intrigues. 

Perjurii poena divlna exltium, humdna dedPcus. — " Perdition 
is the punishment of perjury in heaven, on earth disgrace." 
This was one of the laws of the " Twelve Tables," at Eome. 

Permissu superiorum. — "With the permission of the supe- 
rior authorities." 

Permitte divis ccetera. Hok. — " Leave the rest to the gods." 
Do your duty, and leave the rest to Providence. 

Permittes ipsis expendere numlritbus quid 
Convmiat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris : — 

Cdrior est illis homo quam sibi. Juv. 

— "You will allow the deities themselves to determine 
what may be expedient for us, and suitable to our circum- 
stances. Man is dearer to them than to himself." 

PerpHuo risu pulmunem agitdre solebat. Juv. — " He used to 
shake his sides with an everlasting laugh." 

Perpetuus nulli datur nsus, et hares 

Hceredem alterius, velut unda supervenit undam. Hob. 
— " Perpetual possession is allowed to none, and heir suc- 
ceeds another's heir, as wave follows wave." 

Verque dies placldos hiberno tempore septem 
Incubat Halcybne pendenttbus cequore nidis ; 



8S0 PER— PHA. 

Turn via tufa maris, ventos custddit et arcet 

ji&llus egressu. Ottd. 

— " And during seven calm days, in the winter season, doei 
Halcyone brood upon her nest that floats on the sea ; then 
the passage of the deep is safe, and iEolus shuts in aid 
restrains the winds." The alcedo, halcyon, or king-fisher, 
was supposed by the ancients to incubate only seven days, 
and those in the depth of winter; doting which period 
the mariner might sad in security. Hence the etpreniafl, 
" Halcyon days," a term employed to denote a season oi 
peace and happiness. 

Ptrscepe evPnit ut utilitas cum honestate certat. Cic. — " It 
often happens that self-interest has to struggle with 
honesty." 

PersPquitur scelm tile a man. Ovid. — " He perseveres 

in his wicked design." 

Persotue mutes. — " Mute " or " dumb characters." 

Perturbabantur Constantinbpolitfni i 
InnumerabUibus solicitudliubus. 

— " The Constantinopolitans were alarmed with cares in- 
numerable." Cambridge, it is said, proposed the first 
line, and challenged Oxford to cap it, which it did with 
the second, at the same time pointing out the false quan- 
tity in U, which is properly long. The same story is told 
of Eton and Winchester, and Oxford is sometimes spoken 
of as the challenger. The syllable no, strictly speaking, 
ought to be short. 

Pessimum genus inimicorum laudantes. Tacit. — " Flatterers 
are the worst kind of enemies." 

PPtPre honores per jlagUia, mare Jit. Platjt. — " To seek 
honours by base acts, is the habit of the age." 

Petite hinc, juvPnesque, senesque, 

Finem ammo certum, mtsPrisque viatica canis. Pees. 
— " From this source seek ye, young and old, a definite 
object for your mind, and a provision for your wretched 
gray hairs." 

Petitio ad misericordiam. — " An appeal to compassion." 

Petitio princlpii. — "A begging of the question." 

Pharmaca das cegroto, aurum tibi porrlgit a-ger ; 

Tu morbum curas illlus, ille tuum. M abt. 

— " You give medicine to the sick man, the patient hands 



PHI— PIN. 831 

you your fee ; you cure his complaint, be yours." Lines 
aptly addressed to a poor physician. 

Philosophia stemma non inspirit, Platonem non accfpit nobtlem 
philosophia, sed fecit. Sen. — " Philosophy does not regard 
pedigree, she did not find Plato noble, but she made him 
so." 

Piafraus. — " A. pious fraud." Deceit practised, for instance, 
to save a life that is to be sacrificed illegally, is o, piafraus. 
See Splendide mendax. 

■- ■ Pictbribus atque poetis 

Quidlibet audendi semper fait cequa potestas. Hor. 

— " The power to dare everything always belonged equally 

to the painter and the poet." Boldness of invention is 

equally the characteristic of the pictorial and the poetical 

art. 

Pietas fundamentum est omnium virtutum. Cic. — " Piety is 
the foundation of all virtues." 

Pietdte ac religibne, atque Tide una sapientid, quod Debrum 
immortdlium numtne omnia regi guberndrique perspeximus, 
omnes gentes natibnesque superdvimus. Cic. — " B) piety 
and religion, and this, the only true wisdom, a conviction 
that all things are regulated and governed by the provi- 
dence of the immortal gods, have ve [Romans] subdued 
all races and nations." 

Pietdte adversus Deum subldtd, fides etiam et societas humdni 
gPnPris tollttur. Cic. — " Piety to God once removed, all 
faith and social intercourse among men is at an end." 

Pietdte gravem, ac mentis, si forte virum quern 
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus astant. VlEG. 
— " If they [the populace] perceive a man distinguished 
for piety and virtue, they are silent, and listen with at- 
tentive ear." 

~ — Piger scribendi ferre labor em, 

Scribendi recte ; nam, ut multum, nil moror. Hob. 

— " Too lazy to endure the toil of writing well ; for as to 
the quantity, that is not worth speaking of." Said of Luci- 
lius, but applicable to that class of careless writers who 
will not take the trouble of correcting their works. 

Pignora jam nostri nulla pudbris Jiabes. Ovid. — " Now hast 
thou no pledges of our disgrace." 

Pingere cum gladio. Prov. — "To paint with a sword over 



332 PIX—PLE. 

one's head." To do that which require! thought and re- 
tirement in the midst of confusion and danger. 

Pinguis item qua; sit tell us, hoc dml que pacto 

l)isc7mus ; haud unquam maiubus jactfita fatiscit, 
Sed picis in morem ad dlgltos lentescit habendo. Vino. 
■ — "We may learn what soil is rich in this manner; it 
never crumbles when pressed in the hand, but adheres to the 
fingers like pitch on being handled." Pliny disputes this. 

Pinguis venter non gignit sensum tenuem. Prov. — "A Lit 

Saunch does not produce fine sense." Translated by St. 
erome from the Greek. 
Piriita est hostis hunulni generis. Coke. — "A pirate is an 

enemy to all mankind." 
Piscutor ictus sapiet. Prov. — " The fisherman when stung 

will be wiser." When wounded by the spines on the fishes 

in his net, he will learn to handle them with caution. 
Piscem nature doces. Prov. — " You are teaching a fish how 

to swim." You are wasting your time and labour. 
Pluceat homini quidquid Deo placuit. Sen. — " That which is 

pleasing to God should be pleasing to man." The duty of 

resignation. 
Placet Me mens mihi mend'tcus ; suus rex reglnce placet. 

Plaut. — " This beggar of mine is pleasing to me ; her 

own king pleases the queen." 
Planta genfti. — "A plant of broom." From this plant, 

which formed their crest, the Plantagenet family derived 

its name. 
Plauslbus ex ipsis popidi, l&toque furore, 

IngPnium quodvis incaluisse potest. Ovid. 

— " At the applauses of the public, and at its transports 

of joy, every genius may grow warm." 
Plausu fremltuque virum studiisque faventum 

Pulsiiti colles clamore resultant. Vtbg. 

— " The shaken hills reecho with the plaudits, the cries 

of men, and the cheers of partisans." A description of a 

boat-race or any other friendly trial of strength. 

Plausus tunc arte carfbat. Ovid. — " In those days ap- 
plause was devoid of guile." There was no canvaesir-g 

for applause. 
Plebs venit, ac vlrldes passim disjecta per herbas 

Potat, et accumbit cum pare quisque sua. Ovid. 



PLE— PLIj. 333 

> — " The multitude repair thither and carouse, scattered in 
all quarters upon the green grass ; each with his sweet- 
heart is reclining there." 

Plena fuit vobis omni concordia vita, 

Et stetit adfinem longa tenax que fides. Oyid. 
— " Throughout life there was a firm attachment between 
you, and your prolonged and lasting friendship endured to 
the end." 

Plene administi dvit. Law Phrase. — "He administered in 
full." 

Plenus inconsideratissinice ac dernentissirnce temeritdtis. Cic. 
— " Full of the most inconsiderate and most precipitate 
rashness." 

Plenus rimdrurti sum. Tee. — "I am full of outlets." "I 
am leaky." You must not confide anything to me. 

Plerumque grates divitibus vices. Hoe. — " Change is gener- 
ally pleasant to the rich." Ennui very often gives a taste 
for rambling. See Homes Tibur, &c. 

——Plerumque tnodestus 

Occupat obscuri speciem, taciturnus acerbi. Hob. 

— " The modest man has often the look of the designing 

one, the silent of the sullen." 

Plerumque stulti risum dum captant levem, 
Gravi distringunt alios contumelid, 
Et sibi noctvum constant perlculum. Ph^:d. 
— " Fools often, while trying to raise a silly laugh, provoke 
others by gross affronts, and cause serious danger to 
themselves." 

Plordtur Idcrymis amissa peciinia verts. Jtrv. — " The loss of 
money is lamented with unaffected tears." A loss which, 
through the pocket, strikes home to the feelings. 

Ploravere suis non respondere favorem 

Sperdtum meritis. Hob. 

— " They lamented that the encouragement they had hoped 
for was not commensurate with their merits." 

Pluma laud in tPrest. Plaut. — " It matters not one feather." 

Plurafdciunt homines e consuetudtne, quam e ratibne. — " Men 
do more things from custom than from reason." 

Plura locuturi sublto sednclmur imbre. Ovid. — u About to 
say more we are separated by a sudden shower." 

Plura mala contingunt quam accidunt. — " More evils befall 



334 PLF. 

us, than happen to us by accident." i. e. "We bring man) 
evils upon ourselves. 

JPhira sunt qua nos terrent, quam qua premunt ; et sap ins 
opinione quam re labordmus. Sen. — " There are more 
things to alarm than to afflict us, and we suffer much 
oftener from apprehension than in reality." We are apt 
to be "more frightened than hurt." 

Plures adbrant solem orientem quam occidentem. Prov. 
— "More adore tin- ri>ing sun than the setting one." 

Plures crdpula quum gladius. Prov. — " Gluttony [kills] 
more than the sword." 

Pluribus intenius minor est ad singula sensus. — " The senses, 
when intent on many objects, can pay the less attention 
to each individually." So our proverb which warns us not 
to have "too many irons in the tire." 

Plurima mortis imago. Viro. — " Death in full many a 

form." Hogarth makes this the motto for his " Consulta- 
tion of Physicians." 

Plurima stint qua 

Non audent homines pertusd dicPre land. Juv. 
— " There are a great many things which men with a tat- 
tered garment dare not say." 

Plurtmum facere, et minimum ipso de se logui. Tacit. — " To 
do the most, and say the least of himself." The character 
of a man of energy, no talker but a doer. 

Pluris est oculdtus testis unus quam auriti decern. Plaut. 
— " One eye-witness is better than ten from hearsay." 

Plus aloe's quam mellis habet. — " He has in him more aloes 
than honey." Said of a sarcastic writer. 

Plus apud nos vera ratio vrileat quam vulgi opinio. ClC. 
— " Uenuine reason should prevail with us more than 
public opinion." 

Plus dolet quam necesse est, qui ante dolet quam necesse est. 
Sen. — " He grieves more than is necessary who grieves 
before it is necessary." It only adds to our miseries to 
meet troubles half way. 

— Plus est quam vita salusque, 

Quod perit : in totum mundi prosterriimur ovum. Lucan. 
— " What we lose is more than life and safety ; we are laid 
prostrate even to the latest ages of the world." Prophet- 
ically said with reference to the consequences of the battle 



PLU— PCE. 835 

of Pharsalia, fought between Caesar find Pompey, and ap- 
plicable to any man who forfeits his good name. 

Plus et enimfati valet hora benignl, 
Quam si nos Veneris commendet epistola Marti. Juv. 
— " For one hour of benignant fate is of more avail than a 
letter of recommendation from Venus herself to Mars." 
See Gutta fortunes, &c. 

Plus exempla quam pecedta nocent. Prov. — " The example 
does more injury than the offence itself." 

Plus impetus, majurem constantiam, penes miseros. Tacit. 
— " There is greater energy, and more perseverance, among 
the wretched." Having less to lose and more to gain they 
are reckless of consequences. 

Plus in amicitid valet similitudo morum quam affiriitas. Corn. 
Nep. — " Similarity of manners unites us more strongly in 
friendship than relationship." 

Plus in posse quam in actu. — " More in the possible than in 
the actual." 

Plus Icedunt, quam juvet una, dues. Ovid. — " Two can 
do more harm than one can do good." Said with reference 
to the enmity of Juno and Pallas against Troy, which was 
favoured by Venus. 

Plus oportet scire servum quam loqui. Platjt. — "A servant 
should know more than he tells." 

Plus ratio quam vis ccect valere solet. G-allus. — " Reason 
is generally able to effect more than blind force." 

Plus salis quam sumptus. Corn. JSepos. — " More good taste 
than expense." A description of a philosophical enter- 
tainment. 

Plus scire satius est, quam loqui, 

Servum hominem ; ea sapientia est. Plaut. 

— " It is best for a man in servitude to know more than 

he says : that is true wisdom." See Plus oportet, &c. 

Plus sonat quam valet. Sen. — "It is more noise than strength, 
with him." " Great cry and little wool." 

Plus vident oculi quam oculus. Prov. — " The eyes see more 
than the eye." Two eyes see better than one. 

Plusve minusve. — " More or less." 

Pcenas garrulus ipse dabit. Ovid. — "That blabbing 

person shall be punished." 



33fl PC E— PON. 

Voita nascitur non Jit. — " The poet is born a poet, not inude 
so." See Nascimur poetce, &c. 
Poefica surgit 

Tempestas. Jut. 

— "A storm of poetry is gathering." 

Pol me occidistis, amlci, 

Non servdstis, ait ; cui sic extorta voluptas, 
Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error. Hor. 
— " By Pollux, my friends, you have undone, not saved, 
me ; my delight has been torn from me, and a most pleas- 
ing delusion of the mind taken by force." 

Pol meo dnlmo omnes sapientes 

Suum qfficium cequum est cdlPre, etJacPre. Plaut. 
— " I* faith, in my opinion, it is proper for all prudent per- 
sons to observe and to do their duty." 

Polypi mentem obtlne. Prov. — " Follow the plan of the 
polypus." Accommodate yourself to the changes of cir- 
cumstances, and the dispositions of those around you. 
The polypus was supposed to be able to assume the colour 
of the rocks to which it adhered, aud thus to be able to 
escape notice. 

Po?na, ova, atque nuces, si det tibi sordida, gustes. A medi- 
aeval proverb. — " An apple, an egg, and a nut, you may eat 
after a slut." 

Pompa mortis magis ferret quam mors ipsa. — " The array 
ot the death-bed has more terrors than death itself. 
Quoted by Lord Bacon as from Seneca. 

Pondmus nimios gemitus ; flagrantior a?quo 

Non debet dolor esse viri, nee vulnPre major. Juv. 

— " Let us dismiss excessive sorrow ; a man's grief ought 

not to be immoderate, nor disproportioned to the wound." 

Ponderanda sunt testimonia, non numPranda. — " Testimonies 
are to be weighed, not counted." It is to be considered 
not how many they are, but from whom they come. The 
golden rule of criticism. 

Pone metum, valeo. Ovid. — " Lay aside your fears, I 

am well." 

Pone seram, coKibe ; sed quis custodiet ipsos 

Oustbdes? cauta est, et ab illis inclpit uxor. Jut. 

— " Use bolts and restraint ; but who is to watch toe 



POX— POS. 337 

watchers themselves ? your wife is cunning, and will 
begin by seducing them." A woman who is inclined to 
evil, will find modes of evading every restraint. 

Pons asinbrum. — " The asses' bridge." The Fifth Proposi- 
tion of the 1st book of Euclid is so called ; partly from 
the figure of the diagram, and partly because it presents 
the first great difficulty to the beginner. 

Populdres 

Vincentem strPpltus. Hon. 

— " Overcoming the clamour of the mob." 

JPopiilumque falsis dcdocet uti 

Vbcibus. Hob. 

— " And he teaches the people how to discredit false ru 
mours." 
-Populus rne slbllat ; at milii plaudo 



Ipse domi, simul ac nummos contemplor in area. Hor. 
— " The people hiss me ; but I console myself at home as 
soon as I gaze upon the. money in my chest." The con- 
solation of a miser. 

JPdpiilus vult dPclpi ; decipiatur. — "The people wish to be 
deceived ; then let them be deceived." This adage is found 
in the works of De Thou, but it is probably older than his 
time. Cardinal Caraffa said of the Parisians, Quandoquh- 
dem populus decipi vult, decipiatur, " Since these people 
will be deceived, let them be deceived." 

Porrecto juqiilo, histbrias, capt'ivus tit, audit. Hor. — "With 
outstretched neck, like some slave, he listens to his tales." 
Said of a dependant listening to the long stories of his pa- 
tron. 

Portdtur lemter quod portat quisque libenter. — " What a man 
bears willingly is lightly borne." 

Poscentes vurio multum diversa paluto. Hor. — " Requiring 
with varying taste things widely different from each other." 
The words of an author on fiuding how difficult it was to 
please the various tastes of his readers. 

Posse cotnitdtus. Law Lat. — " The power of the county." 
A levy which the sheriff is authorized to summon, when 
opposition is made to the king's writ, or the execution of 
justice. 

Possessio fratris. Law Term. — " The possession of the bro- 
ther." The name given to the right which a sister has to 

x 



838 wia 

succeed her full brother as heir of what was her father's 
real estate, in preference to her younger half-brother. 

Possunt quia posse videntur. Vino. — " They are able be- 
cause they seem to be so." The result of confidence in 
our own powers. " Where there 's a will there 's a way." 

Post acclanifitionem belticam jiicula volant. — " After the shout 
of war the arrows fly." 

Post amicitiam credendum est, ante amicitiam judiauuhtm. 
Sen. — " After forming a friendship you should place im- 
plicit confidence ; before it is formed you must exercise 
your own judgment." True friendship is endangered by 
mistrust; it ought not therefore to be lightly formed. 

Post bellum auxilium. Prov. — " Aid after the war." Use- 
less assistance. Succour when the danger is over. 

Post cinPres gloria sera venit. Mart. — " Glory comes 

too late, when we are reduced to ashes." 

Post diluvium. See P. D. 

Post epiilas stahis vel passvs mille medbis. — " After eating, 
either stand, or walk a mile." A maxim of the School of 
Health at Salerno. 

Post Pquitem sedet atra cura. Hon. — " Behind the horse- 
man sits livid care." Said of a guilty man who attempts 
to fly from his own reflections. 

Post factum nullum consilium. — " After the deed, counsel is 
in vain." 

Post festum venisti. Prov. — " Tou have come after the feast." 
Like our proverb, " You have come a day after the fair." 
Said to indolent and unpunctual persons who are always 
too late. 

Post folia cadunt arbdres. Plaut. — " After the leaves have 
fallen the tree has to fall." If an injury is too patiently 
submitted to, others will follow. 

Post hoc, propter hoc. — "After this, therefore on account of 
this." An ironical expression implying that the propin- 
quity of two events does not of necessity imply cause and 
eftect. 

Post malam sPgHem serendum est. Sen. — " After a bad crop 
you should sow again." Instead of being discouraged by 
misfortune, we should take measures to repair our loss, 
and not give way to despondency. See Tu ne cede, &c. 

Post medium noctem visus, cum somnia vera. Hoe. — "A vi» 



POS— POT. 330 

sion after midnight, when dreams are true." The ancients 
believed that visions beheld after midnight were always 
true. 

Post meridiem. — " After mid-day." Generally written P. M. 

Post mortem nulla voluptas. — " After death there are no plea- 
sures." The maxim of the Epicureans, who taught that 
life ought to be enjoyed while it lasted. 

Post nubUa Phoebus. Prov. — " After cloudy weather comes 
the sun." Prosperity succeeds adversity. 

Post prandium stabis, post ccenam ambuldbis. — " After dinner 
take rest, after supper use exercise." A maxim of the 
School of Health at Salerno. So our common adage, 
" After dinner sit a while, 
After supper walk a mile." 

Post tmebras lux. — "After darkness light." So, in the mo- 
ral world, the clouds of ignorance are dispelled by the light 
of knowledge. 

Post tot naufragia portum.-^" After so many shipwrecks we 
reach harbour." Motto of the Earl of Sandwich. 

Postea. Law Term. — " Afterwards." The name given to the 
return made by the judge, after verdict, of what has been 
done in the cause ; endorsed on the record and beginning 
with the word Postea, &c, ' Afterwards,' on issue joined, 
Ac. &c. 

PostPri dies testes sunt sapientisstmi. — " Succeeding days are 
the wisest evidences." Actions cannot well be judged of 
till we have seen the results. 

Posthabui tamen illdrum mea stria ludo. VlKG. — " After all, 
I deferred my serious business for their sport." 

*——Postquamfregit subsellia versu, 

Esiirit intactam Paridi nisi vendit Agdven. JlTV. 
— " But while the very benches are broken down by the 
ecstasies with which his verses are applauded, he may 
starve unless he sells his unpublished ' Agave ' to Paris." 

Postuldta. — " Things required." In a disputation, there are 
certain self-evident propositions which form the basis of an 
argument. Hence they are termed "postulates" as their 
admission is absolutely necessary. 

Potentes ne tentes cemuldri. Ph-ED. — " Attempt not to rival 
yoiir superiors." 

Votentia cautis quam acribus consiliis tutius habetur. Tacit. 

i a 



310 POT— PKJ£. 

— " Power is more securely maintained bv prudent than 

by harsh counsels." 
Potentisslmus est qui se habet in potestdte. Sen. — "He is the 

most powerful who can govern himself." 
Potest exercitdtio et temperantia etiam in senectnte conservdre 

all quid prisilni roboris. Cic. — " Exercise and temperance 

may preserve some portion of our youthful strength, even 

in ola age." 

- Pbtuit fortasse minoris 
Piscdtor quam pise is emi. Juv. 

— " The fisherman might perhaps be bought for less money 
than the fish." In the days of Juvenal, incredible sums 
were spent at Kome on the luxuries of the table. 

Praeceps in omnia Ccesar. Lucan. — " C&'sar, prompt 

in all his resolves." 

Prcecepto mbnitus saepe te considera. Ph jeo. — " Warned by 
my lesson, often examine yourself." 

Preedpitatque moras omnes, fiptra omnia rumpit. Vino. — 
" Headlong he resists all delay, breaks through every im- 
pediment." A description of the ardour with which 
JEneas hastens to meet Turn us. 

Pracipua tamen ejus in commovendd miserdtione virtus, ut 
quidam in hoc eum parte omnibus ejusdem opPris autbribus 
prceferant. Quint. — " His great excellence, however, was 
in moving compassion ; so much so, that many give him 
the first place among the writers of that kind." 

Prcecipuum munus anndlium reor, ne virtutes sileantur, utque 
pravis dictis factisque, ex posteritdte et infdmid metus sit. 
Tacit. — " I hold it to be the especial office of history, that 
virtuous actions be not buried in oblivion, and that men 
feel a dread of being deemed infamous by posterity for 
their evil words and actions." The utility and advantage 
of history. 

Praferre patriam llberis regem decet. Sen. — " It becomes a 
king to prefer his country even to his children." His 
duty to his subjects is paramount to every other consider- 
ation. 

Prcemonitus, prcemunltus. Prov. — " Forewarned, forearmed." 

- Prcemonstro tibi 

Ut ita te aliorum miserescat, ne tui alios mistreat. Plaut. 
— " I warn you beforehand, so to have compassion on 



PRJv- PEA. 341 

others that others may not have to pity you." A warning 
to those inclined to be extravagant or over-generous. 

Praemunire. Law Term. — The first word of a writ issued 
for the offence of contempt of the king and his govern- 
ment. 

Vrcepropera consilia raro sunt prospera. Coke. — " Over- 
hasty counsels are rarely prosperous." 

Pr&sentemque refert quceltbet herba Deum. — " And every 
herb reveals a present God." The physical world gives 
abundant proof of the existence of a Providence. 

Prcesertim ut nunc sunt mores, ddeo res redit, 

Si quisquis reddit, magna habenda est gratia. Ter. 
— " According to the present state of manners, things are 
come to such a pass, that if anybody pays a debt it must 
be considered as a great favour." 

Prcestant ceterna caducis. — " Things eternal are better than 
those that fade." Formerly on a clock at Tetbury. 

Prcestat amicitia propinquitdti. Cic. — " Friendship is better 
than relationship." See Plus in amicitia, &c. 

Prcestat cautela quam medela. Coke. — " Precaution is bet- 
ter than cure." 

Prcestat habere acerbos inimlcos, quam eos am'tcos qui dulces 
videantur. Cato. — " It is better to have open enemies 
than pretended friends." 

Prcestat miki liter a linguam; 

Et, si non llceat scribere, mutus ero. OviD. 

— " This letter gives me a tongue ; and were I not allowed 

to write, I should be dumb." 

Prcestat otibsum esse quam male dgere. — " It is better to be 
idle than to do evil." But unfortunately the one almost 
invariably leads to the other. 

Prcestat otibsum esse quam nihil dgere. Pliny, Epist. — 
" Better be idle than do that which is to no purpose." 

Prcevlsus ante, mollior ictus venit. Prov. — " Seen before- 
hand, the blow comes more lightly." " Forewarned is 
forearmed." See Prcemonitus, &c. 

Pravo favbre labi mortdles solent. Ph^d. — " Men are wont 
to err through prejudice." 

Pravo vlvere naso, 
Spectandum nigris ociilis, nigrbque capillo. Hob. 
— " To have a badly-shaped nose, but to be admired fo? 



342 PRE— PEL 

black eyes and black hair." The poet hints that good 
hair and eyes will only make an ugly nose the more con- 
spicuous. 

Pyeces armatce. Auson. — " Armed prayers." Claims made 
with pretended submission, but which are intended to be 
supported by force if necessary : like those of th« beggar 
on the bridge of Segovia, in Gil Bias. 

Prima caritas inclpit a seipso. Prov. — " Charity begins with 
oneself." " Charity begins at home." 

Prima et maxima peecantium est poena peccdsse. Sen. — 
"The first and greatest punishment of sin is the having 
sinned." In allusion to the pangs inflicted on us by 
sham - and conscience. 

Primd facie. — " On the first face." On the first view, or 
at the first glance : according to a first impression. 

Prima fuit re rum confiisa sine online moles : 

TJnaque erant fiicies, sidera, terra, fretum. Ovid. 
— " At first there was a confused mass of things without 
arrangement : and the stars, the earth, and the ocean werw 
of but one appearance." 

Primdque e cade ferarum 

Incaluisse putem maculdtum sanguine ferrum. Ovid. 

— " I can believe that the steel, since stained with blood, 

first grew warm from the slaughter of beasts." 

Primo avulso non di-ficit alter. Vino. — " One being 

torn away, another is not wanting." 

Primo intuitu. — " At the first glance." "At sight," — to use 
a commercial expression. 

Primum ex naturd hanc habemus appetitibnem ut conservemus 
nosmet ipsos. Cic. — " Before everything, we have by 
nature the instinct to preserve ourselves." Self-preserva- 
tion is the first law of nature. 

Primum mobile. — " The primary motive power." An ima- 
ginary centre of gravitation, or central body, in the Ptole- 
maic Astronomy, which was supposed to set all the other 
heavenly bodies in motion. 

Primus ego aspiciam notum de littore pinum. Ovid. — " I 
shall be the first to behold the well-known bark from the 
shore." 

Primus in orbe Deus est timor. — " The rulin^ deity in the 
world is fear." 



PRl. 343 

Primus inter pares. — " The first among his equals." The 
one who, among those of equal rank, in courtesy takes the 
precedence : generally the senior, or the one whose turn 
it is in rotation. 

Primus non sum nee imus. — " I am neither first nor last." 

Primus sapientice gradus est falsa intellige.re. — " The first 
step towards wisdom is to know what is false." 

Princlpes — plus exemplo quampecedto nocent. Cic. — " Princes 
do more mischief by the example they set than by the 
crimes they commit." 

Principibus placuisse viris non ultima laus est. Hon. — " To 
have pleased great men deserves no slight degree of praise." 
Horace was a courtier, and he knew that it requires good 
management to do so. 

Principiis obsta ; sero medwlna pardtur, 

Cum mala per longas convaluere moras. Ovid. 
— " Resist the first advances ; a cure is attempted too late, 
when through long hesitation the malady has waxed 
strong." A precept equally good in medicine and in morals. 

Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos. Mart. — " 'Tis the 
especial virtue of a prince to know his own men." 

Principium dimidium totius. Prov. — " The beginning is half 
of the whole." See Dimidium facti, &c. 

Priscidni caput frangPre. — " To break Priscian's head." A 
mediaeval expression, signifying, " To be guilty of a viola- 
tion of the rules of Grammar." Priscian, who nourished 
in the fifth century, and Donatus, who lived in the fourth, 
were the standard Grammarians of the middle ages. 

Priusquam incipias consulto, et ubi consulueris mature facto 
opus est. Sall. — " Before you begin, take counsel ; but 
having maturely considered, use despatch." 

Privatum commddum publico cedit. Law Maxim. — " Private 
advantage must give way to the public good." See Pub* 
licum bonum, &c. 

Privdtus illis census erat brevis, 

Commune magnum. Hon. 

— " Their private property was small, the public revenue 
great." The state of the Roman republic in her early 
days : when luxury and corruption crept in, individuals 
became possessed of enormous wealth, while the pubho 
treasury was thinned. 



344 PR1— PRO. 

Prisilegiwn est quasi privuta lex. Law Definition. — " Pri- 
vilege is, as it were, private law." In allusion to its deri- 
vation, privd lege, from '* private law." 

Pro aris et focis. — " For our altars and our hearths." In 
defence of our religion and our country. 

Pro bono publico. — "For the public good." 

Pro confesso. — " As confessed." 

Pro et con. {Con. abbrev. of contra?) — " For and against." 
The arguments pro and con, " on both sides of the ques- 
tion." 

Proformd.—" For form's sake." 

Pro hoc vice. — " For this turn." 

Pro interesse suo. Law Term. — " As to his interest." 

Pro pudore, pro abstinentid, pro virtute, audncia, largitio, 
avaritia vigebant. Sall. — " Instead of modesty, instead of 
temperance, instead of virtue, effrontery, corruption, and 
avarice nourished." The state of society in Rome in the 
days of Catiline. 

Pro quibus ut mPrltis referatur gratia, jurat 

Sefore mancipium, tempus in omne, tuum. Ovid. 
— "For which kinduesses, that due thanks may be re- 
turned, he swears he will, for ail future time, be your 
slave." 

Pro rata. — " In proportion " — the word "parte " being un- 
derstood. 

Pro re natd. — " For a special purpose." An assembly held 
pro re natd, on a particular occasion, or an emergency. 
Used also by physicians in reference to medicines to be 
taken pro re natd, as occasion or symptoms may require. 

Pro re nitbrem, et gloriam pro cbpia. 

Qui liabent, meminerint sese unde oriundi sunt. Plaut. 
— " Show for substance, pretence for abundance ; those 
•who have should remember what they Rprunc from." 

Pro salute aritmce. — " For the safety of the soul." 

Pro tanto. — " For so much." So far, to such an extent. 

Pro tempore. — "For the time." Sometimes written Pro tern. 
A thing done pro tempore, is a temporary expedient. 

Pro virtute felix temeritas. Sen. — " Instead of valour, suc- 
cessful rashness." Said by the philosopher in speaking 
of Alexander the Great. 



PRO. 345 

Proba merx facile emptorem repperit. Plaut. — " Good 
wares easily find a buyer." 

Probamque 

Paupe.riem sine dote qucero. Hon. 

— " I court virtuous poverty without a portion." I seek 

tranquillity and happiness, unalloyed oy avarice. 

Probatum est. — " It has been tried and proved." 

Probitas laudatur et alget. Juv. — " Honesty is praised 

and freezes." Cold commendation is often all that is be- 
stowed on honesty. See Aude aliquid, &c. 

Probum patrem esse oportet, qui gnatum suum 

Esse probiorem, quam ipse f writ, postiilet. Platjt. 

— " It befits the father to be virtuous who wishes his son 

to be more virtuous than himself." 

Procellce quanto plus habent vlrium tanto minus teniporis. 
Sen. — " Storms, the more violent they are, the sooner they 
are over." So it is usually with violent outbursts of 
anger. 

Procul a Jove, procul hfulmine. Prov. — " Far from Jupiter, 
far from his thunderbolts." Those who do not feel the 
sunshine of court-favour are safe from the vexations and 
dangers of courtly intrigue. In allusion to the fate of 
Semele. 

Procul, o procul este, profdni. Yieg. — " Afar ! hence, 
afar! ye profane." A warning to keep at a distance, some- 
times used ironically. 

Procul, o procul este, profani, 
Concldmat vates, totoque absistite luco. Vieg. 
— "'Afar! hence, afar! ye profane,' the priestess cries 
aloud, 'retire from all the sacred grove.' " This was the 
solemn preface to the Eleusinian Mysteries, pronounced 
by the officiating priest. 

— — Procul omnis esto 
Clamor et ira. Hob. 

— " Let all bickerings and tumults be afar removed." 

Prodent auctorem vires. Ovid. — "His powers betray 

the author." 

Prodesse civibus. — " To be of service to one's fellow-citi» 
zens." To be engaged in promoting the public good. 

Prodlga non sentit pereuntem foemlna censum : 
At velut exhaustd redivivus pullalet area 



3iG PRO. 

Nummus, et e pleno semper tolhltur acervo, 
Non unquam npiitat, quanti sibi gaudia constent. Juv. 
— " Woman in her prodigality perceives not that her for« 
tune is coming to an end ; and as if money, always reviv- 
ing, would shoot up afresh from the exhausted c&Mfc, and 
she be able to take from a heap always full, ibfl Manor re- 
flects how great a sum her pleasures cost her." 

Prodigiosa loquor vettrum menddcia vat am ; 

Nee tulit hose, necfert, necferet ulla dies. Otid. 

— " I speak of the marvellous fictions of the ancient poets ; 

no time has produced, does produce, or will produce such 

wonders." 

Prodlgus et stultus donat qua spernit et odit ; 

Jlcbc seges ingrdtos tulit, etferet omnibus annis. Hob. 
— " The prodigal and fool gives away the things which he 
despises and hates : this crop (of fools) has ever produced, 
and at all times will produce, ungrateful men." 

Proditionem amo, sed proditorem non laudo.-^-" I like the 
treason, but I praise not the traitor." A proverb bor- 
rowed from Plutarch ; and said to have been used by 
Kichard the Third, on the betrayal of the Duke of 
Buckingham. 

Proditor pro hoste habendus. Cic. — " A traitor must be look- 
ed upon as an enemy." 

Prodltores etiam its quos anteponunt, inv'tsi sunt. Tag. — 
" Traitors are hated even by those whom they favour." 

Profecto delirdmus interdum senes. Plaut. — " In truth we 
old men are sometimes out of our senses." 

Profunda impensce abeunt in rem marittmam. Cic. — "A 
naval establishment is supported at an enormous ex- 
pense." 

Proh superi ! quantum mortdlia pectora ccecce 
Noctis habent ! Ovid. 

— "Ye gods! what blind night envelopes the breasts of 
men ! " 

Prohibenda est ira in puniendo. Cic. — "Anger is to be 
avoided in inflicting punishment." 

Prohibetur ne quis faciat in suo, quod nocere potest in ali'mo. 
Law Max. — " It is unlawful for any man to do, with his 
own property, that which may injure another's." See Sio 
vtere, &c. 



PRO. 347 

oinde tona eldquio, solitum tibi. Vikg. — " "Wherefore 
thunder on in noisy eloquence, as thou art wont." 

Prbficit ampullas et sesquipeddlia verba, 

Si curat cor spectantis tetigisse querela. Hon. 
— " He lays aside his bombastic expressions, and his words 
half a yard long, when it is "jis object to move the heart of 
his hearer by his plaints." 

Promiscuam habere et vulgdrem clementiam non decet ; et tarn 
ignoscere omnibus crudPlitas est quam nulli. Sen. — " It is 
not proper to indulge an indiscriminate and universal 
mercy ; to forgive all is as cruel as to forgive nobody." 
Misplaced lenity is an offence against society. 

Promissio boni viri Jit obligdtio. — " The promise of a good 
man is as good as his bond." 

Promittas facito : quid enim promitUre la?dit ? 
Polllcltis dives quilibet esse potest. Ovid. 

— " Take care and promise ; for what harm is there in 
promising ? Any person can be rich in promises." 

Pronuncidtio est vocis, et vultus, et gestus moderdtio cum venus- 
tdte. — " Delivery is the graceful management of the voice, 
countenance, and gestures." 

Prope ad summum, prope ad exitum. — " The nearer the sum- 
mit, the nearer a fall." The danger attendant on all high 
stations. See Procul a Jove. &c. 

Properat cursu 
Vita citato - - Sen 

— " "With quickened step life hastens on." 

Propone Deum ante oculos. Cic. — " Have God before your 
eyes." 

Propositi nondum pudet, atque eadem est mens, 

TJt bona summa putes, aliend vlvere quadra. Jut. 

— " You are not yet ashamed of your course of life, and 
your feeling is still the same, that you consider living at 
another man's table the chief good." Addressed to a 
spunger or hanger-on. 

Propria domus omnium op£ma. Prov. — " One's own house is 
the best of all." " There is no place like home." 

Propria? telluris herum natura, neque ilium, 

JV^c me, nee quemquam statuit. Nos expulii ille : 
Ulum aut nequities, out vafri inscltia juris, 
Postremb expellet certe vivdeior hares. Hob. 



348 PKO. 

—"Nature has constituted neither him, nor me, nor any 
one else, the absolute possessor of the soil. That man 
ejected me ; either fraud or the quirks and absurdities of 
the law will eject him, or, last of all, some more long-lived 
heir will certainly take his place." See Perpetuus nulli, &c. 

Proprio motu. — " Of his own motion." Spontaneously ; 
uninfluenced by others. 

Proprium est stultitice alidrum vitia cernPre, oblivisci suorum. 
Cic. — " It is the nature of folly to see the faults of others, 
and to forget its own." 

Proprium hoc esse prudential concilidre sibi anhnos Iwmhutm 
et in svos usus adjungPre. Cic. — " It is the part of pru- 
dence to conciliate the minds of one's fellow-men, and to 
turn them to one's own account." 

Proprium humdni ingPnii est odisse quern l&sPris. Tac. — " It 
is the nature of the human disposition to hate him whom 
you have injured." This arises from a consciousness that 
he has reason to dislike you, and that bis forgiveness may 
not be sincere. 

Propter vitam vivendi perdPre causas. Jrrv. — "For the 

sake of living to forfeit every inducement to live." 

Prospectandum vPtiilo latrante. Prov. — " When the old dog 
barks it is time to look out." 

ProspPra lux oritur, linguisque antmisque favele ; 

Nunc dicenda bono sunt bona verba die. Ovid. 

— " A prosperous day is dawning, be ye propitious both in 
your words and thoughts ; now on the auspicious day 
must auspicious language be used." 

ProspPrum et felix scelus virtus vocdtur. Sen. — " Crime, 
when it is fortunate and successful, is called virtue." Re- 
volution is the name given to successful treason and rebel- 
lion. Hence the English epigram, 
" Treason does never prosper: what 's lie reason ? 
That when it prospers, none dare call it treason." 

Protectio trahit subjectionem, et subjectio protectionem. Law 
Max. — " Protection implies allegiance, and alleg'ance pro- 
tection." 

Protinus ad censum, de mbribus ultima Jiet 

Qu&stio. Jut. 

— " The question first put will be as to his income ; that 
about bis morals will be the last of all." 



PKO— PKU. 349 

Prdd%us appdret qua arbor es frugiftrce futurae. Prov.— " It 

it is soon seen which trees will yield fruit." 
Prout cuique libido est, 

Siccat incequnles cdltces convlva solutus 

Insdnis legtbus. Hob. 

— " The guests, each according to his inclination, quaff 

from glasses of different sizes, unconstrained by absurd 

laws." 
Trout res nobis Jluit, ita et animus se habet. — " As things go 

with us, so are our spirits affected." 
Proxinwrum incuriosi, longinqua sectdmur. Pliny, Epist. — 

" Eegardless of things that are near to us, we pursue those 

which are at a distance." 
Proximus a tectis ignis defendltur cegre. Ovid. — " One's 

house is saved with difficulty when one's neighbour's is 

on fire." To the same effect as the next. 
Proximus ardet 

Ucaleqon. YlltG. 

—"Your neighbour Ucalegon is on fire." Meaning his 

house ; words used as a warning that danger is at hand. 
Proximus hinc gradus est, bene desperate salutem, 

Seque semel vera scire perisse fide. Ovid. 

— " The next step after this is entirely to despair of 

safety ; and to feel thoroughly convinced, once for all, 

that we are ruined." 
Proximus sum cgumet mild. Teb. — " I am nearest akin to 

myself." " I love my friends well, but myself better." 
Prudens futuri temporis ex i turn 

Caliginosd node premit Deus ; 

Pidetque, si mortdlis ultra 

Fas trPptdat. Hor. 

• — " A wise Deity shrouds in obscure darkness the events 

of time to come ; and smiles if a mortal is solicitous be- 
yond the law of nature." 
Prudens inflammam ne manum injlcito. Prov. — "If you are 

wise thrust not your hand into the flame." Quoted by 

St. Jerome. 
Prudens interrogdtio quasi dimidium sapientice. — " A prudent 

question is, as it were, one half of wisdom." A maxim 

of Lord Bacon. 
Prudent is est mutdre consilium; stultus sicut luna mutdtur. 



350 PRTT— VUL. 

— " A wise man may change his opinion ; but the fool 
changes as often as the moon." 

Prudentis est nonnunquam silrre. — "It is the part of a pru- 
dent man to be sometimes silent." "Where no probable 
good can result from babbling. 

fit fill cum bontim privdto est praferendum. Late Max. 
— " The public good must be preferred to private ad- 
vantage." 

■ Pudet et hcec opprbbria nobis 

JEt did potuisse, et non potuisse refelli. Hor. 

— " It is shameful both that such reproaches should be 

uttered against us, and that we should be unable to refute 

them." 

Pudet me et mlsPret qui harum mores cantdbat mi hi, 
Mon u isse frustra .——— T E r . 

— " I am ashamed and grieved that he who used to lecture 
me about the manners of these women, advised me in 
vain." 

Pudor demissus nunquam redit in gratiam. Syr. — " Shame, 
once banished, never returns into favour." 

Pudor doceri non potest, nasci potest. Str. — " Modesty 
cannot be taught, it may be born." 

Pud're et liberalitdte librros 

RetinPre, satius esse credo, quam metu. Ter. 

— " I think it better to restrain children through a sense 

of shame and by liberal treatment, than through fear." 

Pugna suum Jinem, cum jacet hostis, habct. Ovid. — " The 
battle has come to an end when the enemy is fallen.'* 
It is ungenerous to exult over a vanquished foe. 

—^Pulchra 

EdPpol pecunia dos est. Plaitt. 

— " I'faith, money is a prepossessing dowry." 

Pulchritudo mundi, ordo rerum coslestium, conversio solis, 
lunce, sidPrumque omnium indicant satis aspectu ipso ea 
omnia non esse fortulta. Cic. — " The beauteous aspect of 
the world, the order of the celestial bodies, the revolu- 
tions of the sun, the moon, and all the stars, indicate suf- 
ficiently, at a mere glance, that all this is not the work of 
chance." 

Pulchrorum autumnus pulcher. — " The autumn of the beauti- 
ful is beautiful." 



PUI-PYT 3C1 

Pulchrum est accusdri ab accusandis. — " It is honourable to 
be accused by those who deserve to be accused." The 
censure of the bad is praise. 

Pulchrum est benefdcPre reipublicee, etiam benedlcere liaud 
absurdum est. BALL. — " It is becoming to act well for 
the republic, to speak well of it even is not discreditable." 

Pulchrum est dlgtto inonstrdri et dicier, Hie est. Pers. 

— See At pulchrum, &c. 

Pulvis et umbra sumus,fruges consumere nati. — " We are but 
dust and shadows, born to consume the fruits of the 
earth." See Fruges consumere, &c. 

Punctum compardtibnis. — " The standard of comparison." 
The fixed measure of value. 

Punicajid.es. — " Punic faith." Among the Romans the bad 
faith of the Carthaginians was proverbial. 

Punltis ingmiis gliscit auctoritas. Tacit. — " When men of 
genius are punished, their influence is increased." A work 
well abused is pretty sure of a good sale, and persecuted 
sects flourish most. 

Puras Deus non plenas adspicit rnanus. Syr. — " God looks 
to pure hands, not to full ones." The Deity values in- 
nocence, not wealth. 

Purgamenta hujus mundi sunt tria, pestis, bellum, et frateria. 
— " There are three modes of purging this world of ours ; 
the plague, war, and monastic seclusion." 

Puris omnia pura. — " Unto the pure all things are pure." 
From Titus i. 15. Equivalent to the motto of the Garter, 
" Honi soit qui mal y pense," " Evil be to him who evil 
thinks thereof." 

Purpura indutus pauper, sui ipsius immemor est. — " A beg- 
gar clothed in purple is unmindful of himself." See As- 
perius nihil, &c. 

Purpureus late qui splendeat unus et alter 

Asswtur pannus. Hor. 

— " One or two verses of purple patch-work, to make a 
great show, are tagged on." 

Pythiignras non sapientem se, sed studiosum sapientice vocdrt 
voluit. Qunvr. — "Pythagoras wished to be called not 
wise, but a lover of wisdom." He wished to be called not 
* " sophist " but a " philosopher." 



352 Q-QT'iF. 

Q. 

Q. V. — See Quod vide. 

Qua vincit victos protPgit ille manu. Ovid. — " With the 
Baine hand with which he conquers he shields the con- 
quered." 

Qudcumque potes, dote plactre, place. Ovid. — " By what- 
ever talent you can please, please." 

Qutulmprdante putrem, soriitu quatit ungiila campum. Viro. 
— "The hoof shakes with prancing din the crumbling 
plain." [This line exemplifies the poetical figure Onoma- 
topoeia, the sound echoing the meaning. The galloping of 
the horse is admirably expressed, if the line is read as it 
is scanned, thus: 

Quadrupe-dante pu-trem soni-tu quatit-ungula-campum.~\ 
flli inter, &c. 

Qua* accessionum locum obtinent extinguuntur cum principal J es 
res peremptce fuPrint. Law Max. — " That which is only 
an accessory is rendered null when the principal is 
abolished." 

Qucc caret ora cruore nostro ? Hor. — " What shores are 
without our blood ? " In what country has not our blood 
been shed ? The poet speaks exultingly in reference to the 
valour of the Komans, and the successes of their arms. 

Qu<e culpdre soles, ea tu nefeceris ipse ; 

Turpe est doctbris cum culpa redarguit ipsum. Cato. 
— " Do not that yourself which you are wont to censure 
in others. It is bad when the censure of the teacher re- 
coils upon himself." 

Qua dubitationis tollenda? causa" contractlbus inferuntur, jus 
commune non ladunt. Law Max. — " G'osses imported into 
a contract for the purpose of removing a doubt, are not ad- 
verse to a common-law right." 

Qua? e longinquo magis placent. JProv. — " The further fetch'd, 
the more things please." 

Qua? fuerant vitia mores sunt. Sen. — " What were vices 
once are now the fashion." Said in reference to the im- 
punity with which vice is practised in a corrupt age. 

Qua? fugiunt, celeri carpite poma manu. Ovid. — " With 
speedy hand, pluck the fruit that passes away." 



QILE. 353 

— Quae fuit durum pati 

Meminisse dulce est. Sen. 

— " What was hard to suffer is pleasant to remember." 
Quce in terris gignuntur omnia, ad usum horriinum creantur. 

do. — " Everything that the earth produces is created for 

the use of man." See Genesis i. 28. 
Quce in testamento ita sunt scripta ut intelllgi non possint 
perinde sunt ac si scripta non essent. Law Max. — " What 

has been so written in a will as to be unintelligible, is to 

be regarded as though it had not been written." 
Quce in vita usurpant homines, cogltant, curant, vident ; qticrqus 

agunt vir/ilanles, ar/itantque, ea cuique in somno acctdunt. 

Cic. — " Those things which engross men in life, which 

they think upon, care for and observe, which employ and 

excite them during the day, present themselves also in 

sleep." 
Quce infra nos nihil ad nos. Prov. — ' : The things that are 

below us are nothing to us." We must look upwards. 
Quce Icedunt oculos festlnas dPmPre : si quid 

Est dnimum, differs curandi tempus in annum. Hor. 

— " The things which offend your eyes you are in haste to 

remove : if anything affects your mind, you defer the cure 

of it for a year." More attention is given by us to the 

cure of physical than moral evils. 
Quce legi communi derogant stride interpret antur. Law Max. 

— " That which is adverse to a right at common law is to 

be interpreted rigidly." 

Quce lucis mlseris tarn dira cupldo ? Virg. — " How is it 

that there should be with the wretched so strong a desire 

to live ? " 

Quce nee reticPre loquenti, 

Nee prior ipsa loqui d'tdicU. Ovid. 

— " [Echo] who has neither learned to hold her tongue 

after another has spoken, nor to speak first herself." 
Quce nee Sarmentus iniquas 

Ccesaris ad mensas, nee vilis Galba tulisset. Juv. 

— " Such things as neither Sarment\is, nor the worthless 

Galba, would have borne at the obscene table of Caesar." 
Quce non prosunt singula, multa juvant. Ovid. — " Things 

which singly are of no avail, when united are of service." 
Qua non valeant singula juncta juvant. Law Max. — "Facts 

1 A 



854 qiiM. 

of little consequence individually are weighty when 
united." 

Qua? peccdmus jnvrnes ea humus series. Prov. — "We pay 
■when old for the misdeeds of our youth." As Colton says, 
The excesses of youth are bills drawn by time, payable 
thirty years after date with interest. 

Qu<t rrgio in ferris nostri non plena laburis ? VlRO. — " What 
region of the earth is not full of our works ?" Said by 
jEneas of the Trojans. Great Britain might justly assume 
this as her motto. 

Quep sint, quae fuerint, qua? mox ventilra trahantur. Vino.— 
" What is, what has been, and what is to be." 

Qiue sunt ii/i/i/r rp id 'drum, aut ludbrum, out scortbrio/t rohtp- 
ti'ites, cum his voluptufibus comparanda?? ClC. — " What 
then are the gratifications to be derived from feasts, from 
pageants, or from women, when compared with these de- 
lights ? " — the pleasures of the intellect, namely. 

Qua- supra vos nihil ad nos. Prov. — " Those things which 
are above us are nothing to us." This was sometime! 
said of astrologers, and with truth. See Qua? infra. 

Qua? uncis sunt unguibus ne nutrias. Prov. — " Do not foster 
animals with hooked claws." Do not enter into friend- 
ship with persons of dangerous character. 

Qua? venit ex tufo, minus est accepta voluptas. Ovid. — "The 
pleasure that is enjoyed i\ safety is the least valued of 
all." " Stolen pleasures are the sweetest." 

Qua? virtus et quanta, boni, sit vlvPre parvo ! Hon. — " How 
great, my friends, is the merit of living upon a little ! " 

Qua? voliimus et credlmus libenter, et qua? senthnus ipsi rell- 
quos sentire putdmus. C-ESAB. — " What we wish, we readil v 
believe, and whatever we think, we imagine that others 
.mink as well." Hence our proverb, " The wish is father 
to the thought." 

Qua?libet concessio fortisslme contra donatbrem interpretanda 
est. Law Max. — " Every grant shall be interpreted most 
strongly against the giver." 

> Qu&que ipse miserrima vidi, 

Et quorum pars magna fui. Virg. 

— " Scenes of wretchedness which I beheld myself, and 
in which I was a principal party." The words of ^ueaa 
when relating to Dido the destruction of Troy. 



QILE— QUA. 355 

Qtuere peregr'mum, vicinia rauca recldmat. Hob. — " ■ Gro seek 

some stranger (to tell it to),' the screaming neighbours 

bawl aloud." 
• Quaerenda pecunia primiim, 

Virtus post nummos. Hob. 

— " Money must first be sought for ; after riches virtue." 

The maxim of a worldly man. 
Qucerere ut absiimant, absumpta requirere certant ; 

Atque ipsce vitiis sunt alimenta vices. Ovid. 

— " They struggle to acquire, that they may lavish, and 

then to obtain again what they have lavished ; and the very 

vicissitudes of life afford nourishment to their vices." 
Qucerit aquas in aquis, et poma fugdeia capiat 

Tantalus ; hoc Mi garrula lingua dedit. Ovid. 

— " In the midst of water, Tantalus is in want of water, 

and catches at the apples as they ever escape him : 'twas 

his babbling tongue caused this." 
Qu&rit, et inventis miser absttnet et timet uti. Hon. — " The 

miser is ever seeking gain, and yet abstains, and dreads to 

use what he has gained." 
Qu&rit, posito pignore, vincat uter. Ovid. — " The stake 

deposited, he asks which has won." The inquiry anxious- 
ly made by one who has bet upon a race. 
Quceritis, JEgisthus quare sit f actus adulter ? 

In prompt u causa est ; desidibsus erat. Ovid. 

— " Do you inquire why JEgisthus became an adulterer ? 

The cause is self-evident: he was an idler." 
Qu&ritur, sitne aquum am'tcos cogndtis anteferre. Cic— " It 

is a question whether it is just to prefer our friends to our 

relatious." 
QiHzsitam merltis sume superbiam. Hob. — " Assume the 

honours which you have sought to gain by your deserts." 
Qu&stio fit de leglbus non de personis. Law Term. — " The 

question is, what is the law? not, who is the offender?" 

The law must be construed with equal impartiality, 

whether for rich or poor. 
Quavis terra alit arffficem. Prov. — " Every land will sup- 
port the artisan." His assistance is so necessary, that he 

will find bread anywhere. 
Quale per incertam lunam sub luce malignd 

Est iter in sylvis. VlBG. 

2 a 2 



356 QUA. 

— " As a path in the woods, seen by the deceiving light of 
the uncertain moon." 

Quale sit id quod amas celeri circumsptce mente ; 
Et tua lasv.ro subtrdhe collajugo. Ovid. 

■ — " Examine quickly and circumspectly what sort of object 
it is with which you are in love ; and withdraw your neck 
from a yoke that is sure to gall." 

Quale solet sylvis, brumdli frlgure, viscum 

Fronde virere novd, quod non sua shnlnat arbos, 
Et croceofcetu tirUes circumddre truncos. VlRG. 

— " As the mistletoe is wont to flourish in tin? woods 
throughout the winter cold, with its verdant leaves, which 
Bpring from no trunk of its own, and to embrace with its 
yellow offspring the tapering stem." 

Qualem commendea etiam atque etiam aspice, ne mox 
Incut iant alifna tibi peccdta pudorem. Hob. 

— " Examine again and again into the worth of a person you 
would recommend, lest the faults of others bring shame 
upon you." 

Qualis ab incepto processerit et sibi constet. Hor. — " As he 
begins, so let him proceed, and be consistent with him- 
self." Instruction offered to a tragic poet. 

Qualis hera tales pedissitqua. Cic. — " Like mistress, like 
maids." 

Qualis populed mcerens Philomela sub umbra 
Flet noctem, rambque sedens miserdblle carmen 
Integrat, et mcestis late loca questibus implet. Viro. 
— "As mourning Philomel, under a poplar shade, weeps 
the night through, and sitting upon a bough renews her 
plaintive song, and fills the places around with piteous 
complaints." 

Qualis rex, talis grex. Frov. — " Like king, like people." 

Qualis sit animus, ipse animus nescit. Cic. — " "What the 
soul is, the soul itself knows not." 

Quales sunt summi civitdtis viri talis est civttas. Cic— 
"The character of a community depends upon that of 
its rulers." 

Qualis ubi audito venantum murmure tigris, 

Horrescit mdculis. Stat. 

— " As when the tigress, on hearing the cry of the hunter.s, 
looks terrible with her spotted skin." . 



QUA. 357 

Quads vita, finis ita. Prov. — " As a man's life has been, so 
will be his end." This proverb apparently leaves no room 
for repentance. 

Quam ad probos propinquitdte proxime te adjunxPris, 

Tarn optimum est. Plaut. 

— " The nearer you can unite yourself in alliance with the 
virtuous, the better." 

■ Quam continuis et quantis longa senectus 

Plena malis ! Juv. 

— " With what continuous and great evils is a prolonged 
old age replete ! " 

Quam difficllis est virtiitis diuturna simuldtio ! Cic. — " How 
difficult it is to feign virtue for any length of time ! " 

Quam din se bene gesserit. — " So long as he shall conduct 
himself properly." A term first used in the letters patent, 
under which the chief baron of the exchequer held his 
office: all the judges now hold their offices by a similar 
tenure. Down to the reign of George the Third, they 
only held them, "Durante beueplacito," which see. See 
also Dum se, &c. 

Quam inlque compardtum est, ii qui minus habent 
Ut semper illiquid addant diviiioribus ! Teb. 

— " How unfairly it has been ordained that those who have 
the least should be always adding to the stores of the 
more wealthy ! " 

Quam male consuevit, quam se parat ille cruori 
Impius Jiumdno, vitidi qui guttura cultro 
Rumpit, et immotas prcebet mugitibus aures ! 
Aut qui vagitus similes puerilibus hoedum 

Eden tern jugular e potest I Ovid. 

— " How greatly does he disgrace himself, how in his im- 
piety does he prepare himself for shedding human blood, 
who cuts the throat of the calf with the knife, and turns a 
deaf ear to its lowings ! or who can slay the kid as it sends 
forth cries like those of a child ! " 

Quam multa injusta ac pravafiunt rnoribus ! Ter. — " How 

. many unjust and improper things are sanctioned by 
custom ! " 

Quam prope ad crimen sine cnmine ! — " How near to guilt, 
without being guilty!" Put interrogatively, this Mas a 



358 QUA. 

favourite query with the Jesuits, who refined very in- 
tensively upon the point. 

Quam quisque novit artem in Tide se exercPat. ClC. — " Let 
every man employ himself in the pursuit which he best 
understands." See JVe sutor, &c. 

— Quam seepe forte temPre 
Eveniunt, quae non audPas optdre ! Teh. 
— " How often things happen by mere chance which you 
would not have dared hope for ! " 

Quam seipsum amans sine rivali ! ClC. — " How much in 
love with himself, and that without a rival ! " A man en- 
tirely absorbed in self-love, and beloved by nobody else. 

Quam tPmPre in nosmet legem sancimus inlquam ! Hok. — 
" How rashly do we sanction a precedent to tell against 
ourselves!" Men in their rashness concur in adopting 
measures of which they themselves become the victims, 
and thus as it were "make a rod for their own back." 

Quam veterrimus hommi opttmus est amicus. Plaut. 

— " The oldest friend is the best friend for a man." 

Quamvis digressu vPtPris confusus anuci 

Laudo tamen. Juv. 

— " However concerned for the loss of my old friend, I 
commend him " — for changing his residence. 

Quamvis sublimes debent humlles metuPre, 
Vindicta doclli quia patet solertice. Piled. 
— " Men, however high in station, ought to be on their 
guard against the lowly ; because to skill and address re- 
venge lies near at hand." 

Quando aliquid prohibetur, prohibetur et omne per quod de- 
vPnitur ad illud. Law Max. — " When a thing is forbid- 
den (by law) everything is forbidden as well which tends 
to it." Whatever is prohibited by law to be done directly, 
cannot legally be effected by an indirect and circuitous 
contrivance. 

Quando ea accidunt nobis qu& nullo consilio vitare possumus, 
eventis aliorum tnemdrid repetendis, nihil novi accidisse 
nobis cdgitPmus. Cic. — " When those things befall us 
which by no prudence we can avoid, Ave shall, by calling to 
memory what has happened to others, be able to reflect 
that uothing new has befallen ourselves." 



QUA. 350 

Quando jus domfni regis et subdlii con turrunt jus reqis prarferri 
debet. Law Max. — " Where the title of the king and the 
title of a subject come into collision, the king's title shall 
be preferred." 

Quando plus fit quam fitri debet, videtur etiam illud fih-i 
quod faciendum est. Law Max. — " Where more is done 
than ought to be done, that portion for which there was 
authority shall hold good." 

Quando res non valet ut ago, valeat quantum valere potest. 
Law Max. — " When an instrument will not operate to 
the extent intended, it shall operate in law r so far as it 
can." 

Quando ullum inveniemus parem? — "When shall we find 
his like again? " 

Quandijque bonus dortnltat Homt'rus ! Hoe. — "Even 

the worthy Homer is caught napping sometimes." The 
most distinguished of men will sometimes make mistakes. 

Quandoqwdem inter nos sanetissima divitidrum 

Majestas. Juv. 

— " Seeing that the majesty of riches is, among us, held 
the most sacred." 

! Quanta est gula, qua? sibi totos 

Ponit apros, animal propter convlvia natum ! Juv. 

— " What a gullet he must have who sets before himself 

whole boars, — an animal born for feasting only ! " 

Quanta patlmur ! — " How great the evils we endure ! " 

Quanta sit admirabilitas ccelestium rerum atque terrestrium ! 
Cic. — " How admirable are the heavens and the earth ! " 

Quanta? sunt tmPbroe ! vce mihi, v& mihi, vce ! — "The gloom 
how great! woe, woe is me! woe, w r oe!" A monkish 
Pentameter, inserted as a specimen of wretchedness in 
both senses. 

Quanti casus humrina rotant ! — " How many ups and downs 
there are in human affairs ! " 

Quanti est cestimanda virtus quae nee erlpi nee surrlpi potest ; 
et neque naufrdgio neque incendio amittltur. Cic. — 
"How r truly valuable is virtue, which cannot be taken 
from us either by force or fraud, and which is not to bo 
lost by shipwreck or by fire ! " 

Quanti est snpere ! Tbr. — " How valuable is wisdom ! " 

Quanto plura recentium sen vHerum revolvo, tanto ludibria 



880 QUA. 

return morldlium cunctis in negotiis observanfitr. Tacit. 
— " The more I revolve in my mind the transactions of 
the moderns or of the ancients, the more conspicuous ap- 
pears the absurdity of human affairs in every point of 
view." A remark in accordance with the diplomatic say- 
ing, that it is "astonishing with how little wisdom the 
world is governed." 

Quanto quisque sibi plura negdverit, 

A Dis plura feret. Hob. 

— "The more a man denies himself, the more shall he 
receive from the gods." 

Quanto sibi in prcelio minus parcunt, tanto tutiures sunt. 
Sall. — " The less careful they are of themselves in battle, 
the safer they are." They insure safety by trusting to their 
valour. 

Quanto superiores sumus, tanto nos gerdmus submissius. ClC. 
— " The higher our rank, the more humbly let us behave 
ourselves." 

Quantum. — " How much." " His quantum" his proper 
allowance, his due proportion. 

Quantum a rerum turpitudine abes, tantum te a verborum 
Ubertdte sejungas. ClC. — " As much as you are incapable 
of a base action, so much should you be averse to loose 
language." 

Quantum est in rebus inane ! Pers. — " "What emptiness 

there is in human affairs ! " How frivolous are the doings 
and fancied interests of men ! See Eccles. i. 2. 
-Quantum inter viburna cupressus. Virg. — " [Excelling] 



aa much as the cypress does the shrubs." 
Quantum meruit. Law Term. — "As much as he deserved." 

An action grounded on a promise, actual or implied, that 

the defendant should pay to the plaintiff for his services 

as much as he should reasonably deserve. 
Quantum mututus ab illo. Vino. — "How greatly 

changed from what he was !" Said of the ghost of Hector 

when it appeared to .iEneas. 
Quantum quisque feret, respiciendus erit. Ovid. — " Each 

man must be regarded according to what he gives." 
Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in area 

Tantum habet etfidei. Jrrr. 

— " The credit of every man is exactly in proportion to tho 



QUA. 361 

money he holds treasured up in Lis chest." In a corrupt 
state of things wealth alone commands iespect. 

Quantum rellgio potuit suadrre malorum ! Lucket. — " To 
such enormous wrongs could superstition persuade ! " 
The poet is speaking of the sacrifice of Iphigenia by her 
father Agamemnon, when ordered by the priest of Diana 
to propitiate the goddess. The line is applicable to the 
mischiefs which have been wrought among mankind by 
fanaticism. 

Quantum sujpicit. — " As much as is sufficient." Sometimes 
written or pronounced Quantum stiff. 

Quantum valeat. — " For as much as it is worth." 
Quantum verfice ad auras 
JEthPrias, tantum rdd'ice in Tartdra tendit. Virg. 
— " As far as it lifts its branches towards the sky, so 
far does it strike its roots to the depths below." Descrip- 
tion of the oak and the beech. 

Quare facit opium dormlre ?• Quia in eo est virtus dormitJva. 
— " Why does opium produce sleep ? Because it has in it 
a sleepy quality." This question and answer were writ- 
ten by Moliere, the French dramatist, in ridicule of that 
ignorance which affects to solve every difficulty by repeat- 
ing the terms of the original question in words a little 
varied. 

Quare impPdit ? Law Lat. — " Why does he disturb ? " The 
name of a writ which lies for the patron of an advowson 
against one who has disturbed his right. 

Quare obstruxit ? Law Term. — " Why lias he obstructed ? " 
The name of a writ lying for him who has a right of 
passage through his neighbour's land, but has been ob- 
structed therein. 

Quare, si fieri potest, et verba omnia, et vox hujus alumnum 
urbis oleant ; ut ordlio liomdna plane videdtur, non clvitdte 
dondta. Quintill. — " If then it can be done, let all your 
words and your pronunciation lead to the impression that 
you are a native of this city ; so that your speech may 
appear to be unquestionably Eoman, and not that of an 
alien who has been presented with its freedom." A warn- 
ing from high authority against the use of dialects and 
provincialisms. 

Quare vitia sua nemo confititur? 



&G2 QUA— QUE. 

Quia etiam nunc in ill is est. Somnum 
JS'itrrdre vigilantis est. Sen. 

— "Why does no man confess his vices? Because he 
still persists in them. It is for the man who has awoke 
to tell his dreams." 

Quartd lund nati. JProv. — " Born in the fourth moon." 
Such persons were thought to be particularly unfortunate. 
Hercules was born in that month ; whose labours, though 
beneficial to the world, were of little advantage to him- 
self. 

Quas dPderis, solas semper habfbis opes. Mart. — " Only the 
wealth which you give away will be yours for ever." 
He that giveth to the poor, lendeth to the Lord. 

Quasi dicas. — " As though you were to say." 

Quasi mures, semper edimus aliPnum cibum. Plaut. — " Like 
mice, we always eat the food of others." The mode of 
life pursued by a spunger or parasite. 

Quatuor pedibus currit. — " It runs on all fours " — with it. 

Quels pdria esse fere placuit peccdta, labdrant 

Ciim ventum ad verum est ; sensus moresque repugnant, 
Atque ipsa uttlitas, justi vrope mater et &qui. Hon. 

— "They who are pleased to rank all faults as nearly 
equal, find themselves in a difficulty when they come to 
the truth of the matter ; sense and morality are opposed 
to them, and expediency itself, the mother almost of right 
and equity." 

Quern casus transit aliquando inveniet. Syr. — "Misfortune will 
one day find him whom it has till then passed by." " The 
pitcher that goes oft to the well comes home broken at last." 

Quern damnbsa Venus, quern prceceps dlea nudat. Hor. — 
" Him whom baneful lust, and the ruinous dice, have 
stripped bare." 

Quern Deus vult perdere, prius dementat. — See Quern Jupiter, 
&c, and Quos Deus, &c. 

Quern di diligunt adolescens moritur. Plaut. — " He whom 
the gods love dies young." 

Quern ego ut mentidtur inducPre possum, eum facile exordre 
potero ut prjeret. Cic. — "Him whom I can induce to tell 
a lie I can easily prevail upon to commit perjury." 

Quern ferret, si parentem non ferret suum ? Ter. — " "WT Jin 
should he bear with, if not with his own father ? " 



QUE. 363 

Qu-em Jupiter vult perdtre dement at prius. — " Him whom 
Jsupiter wishes to ruin, he first deprives of his senses " 
Barnes' translation of the Greek fragment — "Orav 2e 
laiftu)v, &c. See At daemon, &c. 

Quern penes arbitrium est, et jus et norma loquendi. Hob. — 
" Whose province it is to regulate the propriety and rules 
of speech." 

Quern poenitet pecedsse pene est innocens. Sen. — " He who 
repents of having committed a fault is almost inno- 
cent." 

Quern prcestare potest mulier galedta pudorem 

Quae fugit a sexu ? Juv. 

— " What modesty can the woman possess who, with a 
helmet on, flies her own sex ? " 

Quern res plus nimio delectavere secundce, 

Mutfitce quutient. Hob. 

— " The man for whom prosperity has had unbounded 
charms will be most affected by reverses." 

Quern scepe transit, aliquanto invenit. Sen. — " That which is 
often overlooked is detected at last." See Quern casus, &c. 

Quern semper acerbum, 

Semper honordtum (sic, Di, voluistis) Tiabebo. Vibg. 
— " Though the day be for ever embittered, I will, (as ye 
gods have so decreed,) always hold it in honour and re- 
spect." In allusion to the day on which a person has lost 
a dear and esteemed friend. 

Quern si puelldrum insereres choro, 
Mire sagdees fallvret hospites 
Discrlmen obscurum, soliitis 
Cnnibus, amblguoque vultu. Hoe. 

— " If you were to place him in a throng of damsels, the 
undistinguishable difference occasioned by his flowing 
locks and doubtful features would wonderfully impose even 
on discerning strangers." 

Quemcunque mlsprum vldPris, honitnem scias. Sen. — " When- 
ever you behold a fellow-creature in distress, remember 
that he is a man." 

Quemcunque popiilum tristis eventus premit, 
JPericlitdtur magnitudo principum ; 
Minfita plebes fdcili prcesidio latet. Phjed. 

— " Whenever a people is reduced to extremity, the high 



304 QUE— QUI. 

position of its chiefs is in danger: the humble easily find 
safety in obscurity." 

Quemque suae malce cogitationes conscientiaque dnTtni terrent. 
Cic. — " His own galling reflections and the stings of con- 
science fill the mind (of the evil-doer) with alarm." 

Qui alter um incusat probri eum ipsum se inturri oportct. 
Plaut. — " He who accuses another of dishonesty ought to 
look narrowly into himself." An accuser should always 
appear with clean hands. 

Qui amat, tamen hercle si esurit, nullum esurit. Plaut. — 
" He that's in love, i'faith, even if he is hungry, isn't 
hungry at all." He is not sensible of hunger or other 
sufferings. 

Qui amicus est amat ; qui amat non utlque semper amicus est. 
Itaque amicitia semper prodest ; amor ctiam aliquando 
nocet. Sen. — "He who is a friend must love (the ob- 
ject of his regard); but he who loves is not therefore ;i 
friend. Hence, friendship is always productive of good, 
while sometimes love is injurious even." lie alludes to 
that so-called love which seeks its own gratification at any 
cost. 

Qui e nuce nucleum esse vult,frangat nucem. Plaut. — " He 
who would eat the kernel must crack the shell." He who 
would attain perfection in any pursuit must submit to 
toil. 

Qui aut tempus quid postulet non videt, aut plura loquitur, aut 
se ostentat, aut eorum, quibuscum est, rationem non habet, is 
ineptus esse dlcitur. Cic. — " He who does not regard what 
the occasion demands, or talks too much, or swaggers, or 
does not pay becoming respect to the company, may be 
pronounced a fool." 

Qui Bavium non odit, amat tua carmlna, Mccvi. Vino. — " He 
who does not hate Bavius must be pleased with thy lines, 
Maevius." The names of two wretched poets in Virgil's 
days. 

Qui bellus homo, Gotta, pusillus homo est. Mart. — "He, 
Cotta, who is a pretty man is a trifling man." 

Qui bene conjlclet, hunc vatem perhlbeto optimum. — " Consider 
him the best prophet who forms the best conjectures." 
Put the most confidence in him who draws the most ra- 
tional conclusions. 



QUI. 3(35 

Qui bene impPrat, paruPrit aliquando necesse est. Cic. — " He 
who governs well must, of necessity, have at some time 
obeyed." 

Qui capit ille facit. Prov. — "He who takes it to himself 
has done the deed." " If the cap fits him, let him wear 
it." 

Qui cibum e flammd petit. Platjt. — " A man who will snatch 
victuals from the flames [of a funeral pile]." The lowest 
of the low. 

Qui cum triste a Tt quid statute, Jit tristis et ipse ; 

Cuique fere poenam sfimPre poena sua est. Ovid. 

— " One who, when he has come to a sad decision, himself 
is sad ; and to whom it is almost a punishment to inflict 
punishment." This may he said of a merciful judge. 

Qui Curios simulant, et Bacchanalia vivunt. Juv. — " Who 
pretend to be Curii and live like Bacchanals." Curius 
Avas a Roman noted for his extreme frugality and temper- 
ance. 

Qui de contemnendd gloria libros scribunt, nomen suum inscn- 
bunt. — " Those who publish books warning us to despise 
fame insert their own names in the title-page." Thus 
showing that very desire for fame which they affect to 
censure. See Quid nostri, &c. 

Qui dedit benPficium taceat ; narret qui accPpit. Sen. — " Let 
him who has bestowed a benefit be silent ; let him who has 
received it tell of it." 

Qui dedit hoe hodie, eras, si volet, aufPret. Hon. — " He 

who has given to-day may, if he please, take away to-mor- 
row." The public may in their caprice recall the honours 
they have lavished, as easily as they have bestowed them. 

Qui deorum consilia culpet, stultus inscltusque sit, 

Quique eos vitupPret. Plaut. 

— " He who would blame the ordinances of the gods must 
be as foolish and ignorant as he who censures them." 

Qui dldtcit patriot quid dPbeat, et quid amlcis, 

Quo sit ambre parens, quo f rater amandus, et \ospes ; 
Quid sit conscripti, quid judlcis officium, qum 

. Partes in bellum missi ducis ; ille profectb 

JReddPre persona? scit convenientia cuique. Hob. 

— " He who has learned what he owes to his country, and 

nhat to his friends ; with what affection a parent, a bro« 



366 QUI. 

ther, and a guest are to be beloved ; what is the duty of a 
senator, what of a judge ; what the duties of a general 
sent forth to war ; — he surely knows how to assign suitable 
attributes to every character." 

Qui ex damndto coltit nascuntur inter liberos non computantur. 
Law Max. — "The issue of illicit intercourse are not 
reckoned as children." 

Qui facit per alium facit per se. Coke. — " He who docs n 
thing by the agency of another does it himself." He 
is equally guilty and equally responsible for the conse- 

Iuences. This adage was probably derived from the Roman 
<aw. See Consentientes et, &c. 

Qui fert malis auxilium, post tempus dolet. Yns.n. — *■ lie 
who helps the wicked repents it before long." 

Quijinem queeris amoris, 

Cedit amor rebus; res age, tutus eris. Ovid. 

— " You who seek to end your passion, love gives way tc 

employment; attend to business, then you will be safe." 

Qui Jit, Mceo'-nas, ut nemo, quam sibi sortem 
Seu ratio dPdPrit, seufors objicPrit,illd 
Contentus vivat ; laudet diversa sequentes ? Hob. 
— '• How happens it, Maecenas, that no one lives content 
with his lot, whether reason gave it him or chance threw 
it in his way ; but is loud in his commendations of those 
who follow other pursuits ? " 

Qui fugit molam far'inam non invenit. Prov. — " He who flies 
from the mill does not get any meal." The lazy man 
cannot expect to eat the fruits of industry. 

Qui genus humdnum ingmio superdvit, et omnes 

JPr&stinxit, stellus exortus uti aerius Sol. Lucret. 

— " Who in genius surpassed mankind, and outshone all, 
as the rising sun obscures the stars." 

Qui genus jactat suum aliena laudat. Sen". — " He who boasts 
of his descent boasts of that which he owes to others." 
See Et genus, &c. 

Qui homo mature quceslvit pecuniam, 

JVm earn mature parcit, mature esiirit. Plaut. 
— " He who has in good time acquired wealth, unless in 
good time he saves it, will in good time come to starva- 
tion." This maxim was often repeated by Louis XIII. 
of France, who was a gi eat admirer of Plautus. 



QUI. 367 

Qui in amor em 
Prcecipitdvit, pejus perit quam si saxo saliat. Plaut. 
— " He who plunges headlong into love, perishes more 
irremediably than if he leapt from a rock." 

Qui in jus dominiumve alterius succedit jure ejus uti debet. 
Law Max. — " He who succeeds to the right or property 
of another ought to enjoy the privileges appertaining 
thereto." 

Qui invldet minor est. — " He who envies admits his inferi- 
ority." Motto of Earl Cadogan. 

Qui ipse hand anuivit, a?gre amantis ingPnium insplcit. Plattt. 
— " He who has not been in love himself, with difficulty 
sees into the feelings of one who is in love." 

Qui ipsus se contemnit, in eo est indoles industries. Plaut. 
— " He who thinks but poorly of himself, in him there is 
a tendency to well-doing." 

Qui jacet in terra non habet unde cadat. Prov. — " He who 
lies on the ground cannot fall." When we are in the 
utmost misery, there can be no change but for the better. 

Qui jure suo utltur, nemlni facit injuriam. Law Max. — 
" He who uses his own rights does wrong to no man." 

Qui jussu judlcis aliquod fecPrit non videtur dolo malo fecisse, 
quia parere necesse est. Law Max. — "He who does an 
act under the direction of judicial authority, is not held to 
have acted from any wrongful motive, because it was his 
duty to obey." 

Qui male aqit, odit lucem. Prov. — " He who works evil 
hates the'light." See St. John i. 20. 

Qui mare et terras, variisque mundum 
TempPrat horis : 
Unde nil majus generdtur ipso, 
Nee viqet quicquam simile out secundum. Hor. 
. — " [God"] who rules the sea and the earth, aud the whole 
world with the varying seasons : from whom proceeds 
nothing greater than himself; nor does there exist any- 
thing either like him or approaching to him." 

Qui mare tPneat, eum necesse est rerum potiri. Cic. — " The 
state which has the dominion of the ocean must of neces- 
sity be the master." 

Qui mHlce rivit mlsPre vivit. Prov. — " He who livos by 
prescription lives wretchedly." 



308 qui. 

Qui mentlri ant fallPre tnsuPvit palrem, 
Tanto magis is audPbit cat-Pros. Ter. 

" He who has made it a practice to lie to or to deceive 
his father will the more readily venture to deceive others." 

Qui mentltur full it quantum in se est. Aul. Gell. — " He 
who tells a lie deceives so far as he can." 

Qui viori did/cit, servire dedldicit; supra own em potentiam est, 
certe extra omnem. Sen. — •" He who has learned how to 
die has learned how not to be a slave: he is above lb 
power, at all events beyond it." Said in accordance with 
the philosophy of the Stoics, who deemed it meritorious to 
escape by a suicidal death the ills of this life. Cato of 
Utica thus escaped being made captive by Ca>sar. 

Qui multorum providus urbes 

Et mores Mtnlnum inspexit. Hor. 

— " Who carefully viewed the cities, and examined the 
manners, of various nations." Said in commendation of 
Ulysses. 

Qui ne tubPribus propriis offend at amicum, 

Postulat, ignoscet verrnris i/l7us. HoR. 

— " He who wishes his friend not to take offence at his 
own protuberances, will excuse his friend's warts." 

Qui nescit dissimulare nescit vlvPre. — " He who knows not 
how to dissemble knows not how to live." This was a 
favourite maxim with the emperor Frederic Marbarossa, 
Louis the Eleventh of France, and Philip the Second of 
Spain. Though dissimulation is an abominable vice there 
are times when it is absolutely necessary to restrain our 
feelings and check our resentments. 

Qui nihil potest sperare, despPret nihil. — " Let him who can 
hope for nothing despair of nothing." 

Qui nil molltur inepte. Hor. — "' A man who attempts 

nothing without success." Said in reference to the su- 
perior merits of Homer as a poet. 

Qui nimis propPre, minus prospPre. Prov. — "He who makes 
too much haste will have but little success." "The more 
haste, the worse speed." 

Qui non est hodie, eras minus aptus erit. Ovid. — " He who 
is not prepared to-day will be .ess so to-morrow." 

Qui non prtficit, deficit. Prov. — ' He who does not advance 
loges ground." 



QUI. 309 

Qui non lahorat non manducet. — " If any work not, neither 
should he eat." 2 Thess. iii. 10. 

Qui non prohibet quod prohibere potest assentlre vidrtur, 
Law Max. — " He who does not prevent that which he can 
prevent, is held to assent." 

Qui non vetat peccdre cum possit, jubet. Sex. — " He 
who does not prevent a crime when he can, encourages 
it." 

Qui non vult fitiri desidiosus, amet. Ovid. — " Let him who 
would not be an idler, fall in love." Implying that pas- 
sion stirs up the energies, and promises success in the 
pursuit. The same author says, however, in another pass- 
age, that idleness is the parent of guilty passion. See 
Quceritis JEaisthus, &c. 

Qui novit mollissima fandi tempora. — " Who well knows the 
most favourable moment to speak." Adapted from Virgil. 

Qui nunc it per iter tenebricosum, 

llluc unde negant redlre quenquam. Catull. 
— " Who now is travelling along the shaded path to the 
spot from which, they say, no one ever returns." The 
germ probably of the lines in Hamlet, " The undiscover'd 
country, from whose bourne no traveller returns." 

Qui paupPriem verities, potiore metallis 

Libertdte caret, dominum vehet improbus, atque 

Serviet ceternum, quia parvo nesciet uti. Hor. 

— " He who, fearing poverty, forfeits his liberty more 

precious than golden ore, shall, avaricious wretch, submit 

to a master, and be a slave for ever, because he knew 

not how to use a little." Alluding to the Horse in the 

Fable. 

Qui peccat ebrius, luat sobrius. Law Max. — " He who 
offends when drunk must pay for it when sober." 

Qui pendet alienis promissis scepe decipitur. — "He who de- 
pends on the promises of others is often deceived." 

Qui per alium facit per seipsum facere vidrtur. Law Max. 
— " He who does a thing by another is held to have done 
it himself." See Qui facit, &c. 

Qui per virtiltcm plfrttat, non intPrit. Platjt. — " He who 
dies for virtue's sake, does not perish." 

——Quiprcegnlvat arte* 

Infra se posit as, extinct us amdbitur idem. Hon. 
2 B 



370 V^tTI. 

— " He who outweighs the energies of those beneath hun, 

will still be loved when dead." 
Qui prior est tempore potior est jure. Coke. — " He who ia 

tin" that in time has the preferable right." As in the 

case of mortgagees ; the first is to be paid before the 

second. 
Qui pro quo. — " Who for whom." One thing instead of 

another. Something quite different. The nominative 

qui, and the ablative quo, here given, are the most distant 

cases. 
Qui quce vult dicit, quod non vult audiet. Tee. — " He who 

says what he likes, will hear what he does not like." 
Qui se committit homlni tutandum imprdbo, 

Auxilia dum reqwrit, exit in M inc<nit. PhjED. 

— " He who intrusts himself to the protection of a wicked 

man, while he seeks assistance, meets with destruction." 
Qui se lauduri gaudet verbis subddlis, 

Fere dat poenas turpi pcenitentid. Ph.ed. 

— " He who is delighted at being flattered with artful words, 

generally pays the penalty by ignominious repentance." 
Qui se ultro morti q/frrant, facilius reptriuntur, quam qui 

dolorem patienter ferant. Cesar. — "It is easier to find 

men who will volunteer to die than who will endure suffer- 
ing with patience." 
Qui seipsum laudat, cito derisdrem internet. Str. — " lie 

who praises himself will soon find some one to laugh at 

him." 
Qui semel aspexit quantum dimissa petitis 

Prccstant, mature redeat, ripPtatque relicta. II OR. 

— " Let him, as soon as he has discovered how much the 

life he has abandoned is preferable to that which he has 

chosen, immediately return, and resume that which he had 

relinquished." 
Qui semel est Icesus fallaci piscis ab hamo, 

Omnibus unca cibis cera subesse putat. Ovid. 

— "The fish that has been once hurt by the deceitful 

hook thinks that the barbed metal lies concealed in every 

morsel." 
Qui semel gustarit canis, a, corio nunquam absterretur. Jfrov. 

— " The dog that has once tasted the flesh, is never to be 

frightened from the skin.'' 



QUI. S7I 

Qui semel acurra, nunquam paterfamilias. ClC. — " He whc 
has once been a buffoon will never make a father of a 
family." 

Qui sentit commodum, sentlre debet et onus. Law Max. — 
" He who derives the advantage ought also to sustain 
the burden." He who reaps the benefit must share in 
the expense. 

Qui sibi amicus est, scito hunc amlcum omnibus esse. Sen. — • 
" Know that he who is a friend to himself is a friend to 
all." He who does his duty to himself must of necessity 
do his duty to all the world. 

Qui sic jocdtur, tractantem ut seria vincat : 
Seria quum faciet, die rogo, quantus erit ? 
" He who a tale so learnedly could tell, 
That no true history ever pleased so well ; 
How much in serious things would he excel ? " 
An Epigram by Theodore Beza upon the works of Kabelais. 

Qui slmulat verbis, n"c corde estjidus amicus ; 

Tu quoquefac simile, et sic ars deliiditur arte. Cato. 
— " If any one tries to deceive you with his words, and is 
not, at heart, a sincere friend, do you act the same with 
him, and so art will be foiled by art." 

Qui spe aluntur, pendent, non vivunt. Prov. — " Those who 
feed on hope, exist in suspense, they do not live." 

Qui stadium currit, niti et contendere debet ut vincat. Cic. 
— " He who runs a race ought to strive and endeavour to 
win." 

Qui statuit all quid parte inaudltd altera, 

jEquum licet statuerit, haud cequus fuerit. Sen. 
— " He who comes to any decision while one side is un- 
heard, even though his decision should be just, is not just 
himself." 

Qui studet optdtam cursu contingere metam, 
Multa tulit fecitque puer, suddvit et alsit, 
Abstinuit Venere et vino. Hob. 

— " He who is eager to reach the wished-for goal, has 
done and suffered much in his youth ; he has sweated and 
shivered with cold, he has abstained from love and wine." 

Qui suis rebus contentus est, liuic maxima? ac certisshnw sunt 
dicltice. — " He who is contented with his own, possesses 
the greatest and most certain riches." 
2 b 2 



372 QUI. 

Qui tacet consentlre viditur. Law Maxim. — " He who is 
silent is assumed to consent." " Silence gives consent." 

Qui tarn. Law Lat. — " Who so." The title given to an action 
in the nature of an information on a penal statute. 

Qui terret plus ipse timet. Claud. — " He who causes terror 
to others feels still more dread himself." The despot, 
who rules by arbitrary sway, lives in a state of continual 
apprehension and alarm. 

Qui tlmlde rogat, docet negate . Sen. — " He who asks timidly 
courts a denial." Bequests made with a certain degree 
of confidence are the most likely to be successful. 

Qui vcnit hicjluctus,jluctus supert-rriinet omnes ; 
Posterior nono est, undPctmoque prior. Ovid. 

— " The wave that approaches overtops all the others, it 
follows the ninth, and comes before the eleventh." See 
Vastius imurgens, &c. 

Qui vitat molam, vital farinam. Prov. — " He who shuns the 
mill, shuns the meal." With everything we must be 
content to take the attendant evils. See Quifugit, &c. 

Qui vult decipi, decipidtur. Prov. — " He who wishes to be 
deceived, let him be deceived." 

Quibus res tlmtda aut turblda est ; 

Pergunt turbdre usque, ut ne quod possit conquiescPre. 

Plaut. 
— " They whose affairs are in a critical or perplexed state 
proceed to render them more perplexed, so that nothiug 
can be settled." 

Quicquid ages IgUur, magna spectdbPre scend. Ovid. — " What- 
ever you do, therefore, you will be acting upon an ex- 
tended stage." 

Quicquid agunt hfrmines nostri est farrago libelli. — Adapted 
from Juvenal. " Whatever men are engaged in makes the 
medley of my book." 

Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achlvi. Hoe. — See Deli- 
rant reges, &c. 

Quicquid erit, superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est. Virg. 
— " Whatever may befall us, all (adverse) fortune can be 
surmounted by enduring it." 

Quicquid est boni nioris levitate extinguitur. Sen. — " What- 
ever is good and virtuous is obscured by levity of con- 
duct." 



QUI. 373 

Quicquid est illud, quod sentit, quod sapit, quod vuft, quod 
viqet, cceleste et div/num est, ob eamque rem eeternum sit 
necesse est. Cic. — " Whatever that he, which thinks, which 
understands, which wills, which acts, it is something heaven- 
ly and divine, and, for that reason, must necessarily be 
eternal." 

Quicquid excessit modum 
JPendet instdbili loco. Sen. 

— " Whatever has exceeded its due bounds is always in a 
state of instability." See Est modus in rebus, &c. 

Quicquid in altumfortiina tulit, ruitura levat. Sen. — " What- 
ever fortune has raised aloft, she has raised only to let it 
fall." See Prope ad, &c. 

Quicquid in eum officii contuPris, id ita acclpio, nt in me ip- 
sum te putem contulisse. Cic. — " Whatever kindness you 
may confer upon him, I shall esteem it as though you con- 
ferred it upon myself.' ' 

Quicquid in linguam vimerit offundere. — " To pour out what- 
ever comes upon the tongue." To say whatever comes 
uppermost. 

Quicquid multis pecedtur, inultum est. Lucan. — " Wher- 
ever a crime is shared by many, no punishment follows." 
Unless it is agreed that atonement shall be made by a 
scape-goat. 

Quicquid pi antfitur solo solo cedit. Law Max. — " Whatever 
is affixed to the soil belongs thereto. 

Quicquid preeclpies esto brevis. Hob. — " Whatever vou 

may enjoin, be brief." 

Quicquid serviitur, cvptmus magis, ipsaque furem 

Cura vocat : pauci, quod sinit alter, amant. Ovid. 
— " Whatever is treasured up, we long for it the more, and 
the very care bestowed on it invites the thief ; few care for 
that which another grants." 

Quicquid sub terris est, in apr'icum proferet (Etas ; 

Defodiet condetque nitentia. Hor. 

— " Whatever there is concealed beneath the ground, time 
will bring it to open sunshine ; and will bury and consign 
to darkness things which are now conspicuous." 

Quicquid vult habere nemo potest. — " No man can have every- 
thing he wishes for." 



374 QUI. 

Quicunque am'isit dignitatem pristlnam, 

Jgndvis est etiam jocus in casit mm, Piled. 

— " Whoever has fallen from his previous high estate, is in 

his heavy calamity the butt even of cowards." 

Quicunque turpi fraude semel inniituit, 

JJtiamsi vemm dicit, amittit Jidem. Ph.j:d. 

— " Whoever has once become notorious by base fraud, 

even if he speaks the truth, gains no belief" 

Quicunque vult servdri. — " Whosoever will be saved." The 
beginning of the Athanasian Creed. 

Quid ad farinas ? JProv. — " How will this find you in flour ? " 
AVhat profit do you expect from this ? 

Quid ad Mercurium ? Prov. — " What has this to do with 
Mercury ? " He was the god of eloquence, and this ques- 
tion was put to one who wandered away from his subject. 

Quid aternis minorem 

Consiliis driimum fdtigas ? Hoe. 

— "Why fatigue vour mind, unequal to eternal pro- 
jects ? " 

Quid afferre consilii -potest, qui seipse eget consilio? ClC. 
— * What counsel can he give to others, who has need of 
counsel himself? " 

Quid brevi fortes jaculdmur arvo 

Multa? * Hob. 

— " Why do we, whose life is so short, so resolutely aim at 
so many things ? " 

Quid datur a Divis felici optdtius nord ? Catull. — " What 
can be granted us by the gods more desirable than a 
happy hour ? " Meaning favourable opportunity, or lucky 
occasion, which was termed " Felix hora." 

Quid deceat, quid non ; quo virtus, quo ferat error. Hoe. — 
" What is becoming, what not ; what is the tendency of 
excellence, what of error." 

Quid deceat vos, non quantum llceat vobis, spectdre debetis. 
— " You ought to consider, not what is lawful for you 
to do, but what is becoming." There are acts not for- 
bidden by law which it would not be justifiable to commit. 

Quid de quoque viro, et cui dicas, scepe cavido. " Be 

ever on your guard what you say about another man. and 
to whom you say it." Properly Quod de, &c, which see. 



QUI. 375 

Qitid dem ? quid non dem ? renuis tu quod jubet alter. ITob. 
— " What shall I give ? what shall I not give ? you refuse 
what another demands." The difficulties of authors who 
have to write for capricious readers. 

Quid dignv/m tanto feret hie promissor hidtu ? Hon. — 
" What will this promiser produce, worthy of all this 
gaping?" ' . 

Quid dignum tanto tibi ventre guldque precabor ? Mart. — 
" What shall I pray for as worthy of so vast a paunch 
and appetite as yours ? " 

Quid domlni facient audent cum talia fares ? Virg. — " What 
will the masters be doing when the knaves dare do such 
things ? " 

Quid dulcius Tiomlnum gPnPri a natiird datum est, quam sui 
cuique llbPri ? Cic. — " What has been given by Nature 
more dear to man than his children ?" 

Quid ego ex kdc inopid nunc cdpiam ? Ter. — " What am I 
now to take from such a scarcity ? " Where there is such 
a want of everything, who can take from the little there 
is? 

Quid enim ? Goncurritur — Tiorae 
Momento cito mors venit, ant victoria lata. Hor. 
— " For why ? They join battle, and in a moment oi time 
there comes speedy death or joyous victory." 

Quid enim ratione timPmus 

Aut ciiptmus? Juv. 

— " For what is there that we either fear or wish for as 
reason would direct ? " 

Quid enim salvis infdmia nummis. Jtjv. — " For what 

matters infamy so long as the money is safe ? " 

Quid est somnus, geVidce nisi mortis imago ? Ovid. — 
" What is sleep but the image of cold de.^th ? " 

Quid est tarn inhumanum quam eloquentiam, a natiird ad 
saliitem homlnum et ad conservationem datam, ad bonorum 
pestem perniciemque convertPre T Cic. — " What is so in- 
human as to convert that eloquence, which by nature has 
been granted for the safety and preservation of man, into 
the annoyance and destruction of the good ? " 

Quid est turpius quam senex vivPre inclpiens ? Sen. — " What 
is more shocking than to see an old man only just begin- 
ning to live ? " What can be more dreadful than to see 



370 QUI. 

a man advanced in years, and yet a child in the practice of 

virtue ? 
Quid facient pauci contra tot miUia fortes ? Ovid — " "What 

Can a few brave men do against so many thousands?" 
Quid fades, fades Vi-ntris si vi'nPris ante : 

Ne pPreas per eas ; ne sPdeas, sed eas. 

— '• What should you do if you come into Venus' pra- 

Bence ? That you may not perish through it, sit not 

down — but begone." A punning distich, written by the 

Marquis De Bierve in the 17th century, on the words 

fades, veneris, pereas, and sedeas. Quoted in Notes and 

Queries, viii. 539. 
Quid fads, inftlix ' Perdis bona vota. Ovid. — " What 

are you doing, unhappy man? Xou are losing our good 

wishes." 
Quidfrustra simulacra fugiicia oaptmt 

Quod petis, est nusquam : quod amax avert? re, perdes. 

Ista revercussee quam cernis imdglnis umbra cut, 

Nil haoet ista sui. OviD. 

— " Why dost thou vainly catch at the flying image ? 

"What thou art seeking is nowhere : what thou lovest, 

turn but away and thou shalt lose ; what thou seest, is but 

the shadow of a reflected form ; it has nothing of its own." 

From the story of Narcissus. 
Quid furor est, census corpore ferre suo ! Ovid. — " "What 

madness it is, to be carrying a whole fortune on one's 

back ! " 
Quid habet pulchri constructus acervus ? Hon. — " What 

beauty is there in money piled up in heaps ? " 
Quid juvat immensum te argenti pondus et auri 

Furtim defossd finitdum deponPre terra ? Hob. 

— u What pleasure can it afford you to bury stealthily and 

in fear immense sums of silver and gold under ground ? " 
Quid leges sine moribus 

Vanw prqficiunt ? Hor. 

— " Of what avail are empty laws, without good morals : " 
Quid magis est durum saxo, quid mollius undd ? 

Dura tamen molli saxa cavantur aqua. Ovid. 

— " What is there harder than stone, what more yielding 

than water ? Yet hard stones are hollowed by yielding 

water." 



QUI. 377 

— ■ Quid, mea cum pugnat senteniia sccum f 
Quod pPtiit spernit, rPpHit quod nuper omlsit ? 
JEstuat, et vitce disconvPnit ordlne toto t Hem. 

— " What think you of me when my judgment is at vari- 
ance with itself? When it despises what it just before 
desired, and desires what it lately rejected ? When it ia 
agitated by passion, and disturbs the whole tenor of life ? " 

Quid mentem traxisse polo, quid prbfuit altum 

Erexisse caput, pPcPtdum si more pererrant ? Claud. 
— " What profits it to man to have derived a soul from 
heaven, what to lift his head with look erect, if, after the 
manner of brutes, he goes astray ? " 

Quid moror exemplis, quorum me turba fatlgat ? Ovid. — 
" Why occupy myself with illustrations, the number of 
which exhausts me?" 

Quid nisi victis dolor ? — " What is there but misery for the 
conquered?" 

Quid non ebriPtas designed ?■ Operta reclfidit ; 
Spesjubet esse ratas ; in prcelia trudit inertem ; 
Sollicitis dnlmis onus exlmit ; addocet artes. Hor. 
— " What does not drink achieve ? it discloses secrets ; 
commands our hopes to be ratified ; urges the dastard to 
the fight ; removes pressure from troubled minds ; teaches 
the arts." 

Quid non mortdlia pectura cogis, 

Auri sacra fames ? VlRG. 

— " To what crimes dost thou not impel the mortal brea&t, 
cursed greed for gold ? " 

Quid nos dura refuglmus 
JEtas ? Quid intactum nefasti 
iAquimus ? Hor. 

— " What have we, an evil generation, deemed too bad P 
What have we, a wicked race, left inviolate ? " 

Quid nostri philosdphi ? Nonne in his libris ipsis, quos scri- 
bunt de contemnendd gloria, sua nbmlna inscribunt ? ClC. 
— " What do our philosophers ? Do they not, in those 
very books which they write on the contempt of glory, 
inscribe their own names ? " See Qui de, &c. 

Quid nunc? — "What now?" What news? A person 
who, like the Athenians in Saint Paul's time, is always ou 
the hunt for news is satirically called a quidnunc. 



S78 QUI. 

••Quid oportet 
Nos ffictre, a vulgo longe lateque remdtos ? Hob. 
— " What then must we do, when our sentiments differ 
so far and wide from those of the vulgar ? " 

Quid pro quo. — " One thing for another." " He expects a 
quid pro quo," — he looks for something in return. 

Quid prodest, Pontlce, longo 

Sanguine censeri, pictosque ostendere vultus 

Majorum ? Juv. 

— " What boots it, Ponticus, to be accounted of a long 
line, and to display the painted busts of our ancestors ? 

Quid prosunt leges sine morlbus t — See Quid leges, &c. 

Quid quceque ferat rtgio, et quid quaeque recuset. Vina.— 
" What crop each Boil produces, and what each soil 
refuses to bear." A subject for the chemical agricul- 
turists. 

Quid quisque vitet, nunquam huniini satis 

Cautum est in horas. Hor. 

— " Against that which each should avoid, no man takes 
sufficient precaution at all hours." 

Quid rides ? Mutdto nomine de te 

Fdbtila narrdtur. Hob. 

— " Why do you laugh ? " &c. See Mutato nomine, &c. 

Quid Pomce fdciam? mentiri nescio. Juv. — "What 

shall I do at Rome ? I know not how to lie." He alludes 
to the corruption prevalent in Rome, where lying was the 
fashion. 

Quid si caelum ruat ? Prov. — " What if the sky should fall ? " 
Signifying the height of improbability. 

Quid? si quis vultu torvo ferus, et pede nudo, 
Exigu<sque togee simulet texture Catonem ; 
Virtutemne reprcesentet, moresque Catonis ? Hon. 
— " What ! If any savage, by a stern countenance and 
bare feet, and the texture of a scanty gown, were to ape 
Cato ; would he represent the virtue and morals of Cato ? " 

Quid sit futurum eras fuge queerPre, et 
Quern sors dierum cunque dabit, lucro 

Appone. Hob. 

— "Avoid inquiring what may happen to-morrow, and 
every day that fortune shall bestow on you, set down to 
your gain." 



QUI. 370 

Quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe. quid utile, quid non. Hon. 
— " What is lovely, what base, what profitable, or what 
the contrary." Horace says that Homer excels hi the 
investigation of all these points. 

■ Quid tarn dextro pede conclpis, ut te 

Condtus non poeniteat, votlque peracti ? Jut. 

— " What is there that you enter upon under such favour- 
able auspices, aa not to repent of your undertaking and 
the accomplishment of your wish ? " 

Quid tarn r'idlculum quam appete.re mortem, cum vitam tibi 
inquietam fecPris metu mortis ? Sen. — " What is so ridi- 
culous, as to seek death, when you have made your life 
miserable by the fear of death ? " Addressed to those 
who would justify suicide. 

Quid te exempta juvat spinis de plurtbus una ? Hor. — 
" What does it avail you if one thorn is extracted out of 
many ? " The removal of a single grievance is little felt 
if many are allowed to remain. See Exempta juvat, &c. 

Quid te Igitur retulit 

Beneficum esse oratione, si ad rem auxilium emortuum est ? 

Plaut. 
— " What does it signify your being bounteous in talk, if 
all real aid is dead and gone ? " 

Quid terras alio calentes 

Sole mutdmus ? Hoe. 

— " Why do we change our own country for climates 
warmed by another sun?" Addressed to men of unset 
tied dispositions. 

Quid tibi cum glcidio ? Dubiam rege, ndvtta, pinum : 

Non sunt hcec dlgitis arma tenenda tuis. Ovid. 

— " What hast thou to do with the sword ? Steers- 
man, guide the veering bark. These are not the imple- 
ments that should be grasped by thy fingers." Lines 
which may be aptly addressed to one who vainly endeav- 
ours to distinguish himself both as a soldier and a states- 
man. 

Quid tibi cum pPliigo ? Terra contenta faisses. Ovin. — 
" What have you to do with the sea ? With the land 
vou might have been content." 

Quid tristes querimonia 

Si non supplicio culpa recld/tur ? Hob. 



r»o qi i. 

— "To what purpose are our woeful complaint*, if sin is 

not checked with punishment ? " 
Quid turjnus quam mpientii vitam ex insipicntis scrmbne 

pendPre? — "What more unjust than to form an estimate 

of the life of a wise man from the words of a fool ? " 
Quid verum atque deceits euro et rogo, et omnis in hoc sum. 

Hob. — " My care and study is what is genuine and proper 

and in this I am wholly engaged." 
Quid vet at a magnis ad res exempla minores 

SiimPre ? Ovid. 

" What forbids me to apply illustrations from great mat- 
ters to small ones ? " 
Quid vici prosunt aut horrea ? 

Si metit Orcus 

Orandia cum parvis, non exordbilis auro. Hor. 

— " Of what use are estates or granaries, if death, who 

cannot be bribed by gold, mows down equally the neat 

with the small ? " 
Quid, victor, gaudes ? Heec te victoria perdet. Ovid. — 

" Why, victor, dost thou rejoice ? This victory shall prove 

thy ruin." 
Quid violentius aure tyranni ? Juv. — "What is more 

intemperate than the ear of a tyrant ? " He, least of all, 

will brook advice or the honest truth. 
Quid virtus, et quid sapientia possit, 

Utile proposuit nobis exemplar Ulyssem. Hor. 

— " To show what virtue and what wisdom can do, [Homer] 

has propounded Ulysses as an instructive pattern." 
Quid voveat dulci nutricula majus alumno, 

Quam sdpPre, etfari ut possit quce sentiat, et cui 

Gratia, fama, vuUtndo contingat abunde, 

Et mundus victus, non deficiente crumPnd ? Hor. 

— " What greater blessing could a tender nurse solicit for 

her beloved child, than that he might be wise, and able to 

express his sentiments, and that respect, reputation, and 

health might be his lot in abundance, and a respectable 

living with a never-failing purse ? " 
Quulam ex vultu conjectiiram faciunt quantum quisque an/mi 

habere videdtur. ClC. — "Some persons are able to judge 

from the countenance, how much intelligence each person 

is likely to have." 



QUI. 381 

Quidque agat, ignarus stupet, et necfrcena remittit 

,"V*o retinere valet. Ovid. 

— " Ignorant what to do, he is stupefied ; he neither lets 
go the reins, nor holds fast." Said of Phaeton. 

Quidquid dicunt, laudo ; id rursum si negant, laudo id quoque. 
Ter. — " Whatever they say, I praise it ; again, if they deny 
it, I praise that too." The rule of conduct of a time- 
serving flatterer. Such persons the Romans called assent- 
atores. 

Quidquid prceter spent evPnit, id omne in lucro est deputan- 
dum. Ter. — " AVhatever has resulted beyond our ex- 
pectations, must all be set down as clear gain." 

Quit'ta non inovPre. JProv. — " Not to move things at rest." 
" To let well alone." 

QuiPte et pure atque eleganter actoe cetntis, placida et lenis re- 
corddtio. Cic. — " Of a life passed in tranquillity, and in 
innocent and elegant pursuits, the remembrance is pleas- 
ing and delightful." 

Quilibet potest renunciare juri pro se introducto. Law Max. 
— " Any one may renounce the benefit of a stipulation in- 
troduced exclusively in his own favour." 

Quique (iliis cavit, non cavet ipse sibi. Ovid. — " And he 
that has defended others fails to defend himself." 

Quique niagis tPgltur, tectus magis cestuat ignis. Ovid. — 
"And the more the flame is covered, the more it spreads." 

Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo. Viro. — See 
Inventas aut, &c. 

Quis custodiet ipsos custodes ? Juv. — See Pone seram, &c. 

Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus 

Tarn cari capitis ? Hor. 

— "What moderation or limit can there be to our regret 
at the loss of so dear a friend? " 

Quis deus hanc, Musce, quis nobis extudit artem ? Ytrb. — 
" What god, ye Muses, first revealed to us this art ? " 
Quis enim virtutem amplectltur ipsam, 

J?ra?mia si tollas? Juv. 

— " For who would embrace virtue herself, if you take 
away the reward ? " No man is utterly disinterested in 
the practice of the greatest virtue ; he expects at least the 
reward of a good conscience. See Si cum, &c, and Scire 
tuum, <&c. 



382 QUI. 

Quis est entm, qui totum diem jaciilans, non ullquando coUU 
neat ? Cic. — " For who is there that will not, when shoot- 
ing all day long, at last hit the mark ? " 

Quis expedlvit psittaco suum \alpt ? Pees. — " "Who taught 
that parrot nis 'how d'ye do?'" "Who taught that 
fool to quote Greek r" 

Quis fallere possit amajttem ? ViRG. — " Who can deceive 
a man in love ? " Who can escape a lover's jealous vigil- 
ance ? 

Quis famulus amantior dfimlni quam canis ? Colum. — " "What 
servant is more attached to his master than the dog? " 

Quisfuit, horrendos primus qui protiilit enses? 
Quam ferus, et verefevveus illefuit! Tiiiul. 

— M Who was the man that first produced the dreadful 
sword ? how savage, how truly iron-hearted was he ! " 
The play upon the resemblance of the words ferus and 
fvrreus cannot be expressed in English. 

Quis furor, O cives, qua? tanta licentia ferri? Lucan\ — 
" What madness, O citizens ! why this dreadful licence of 
the sword ? " An appeal which may be made in a case of 
popular insurrection. 

Quis inlquw 

Tarn patiens urbis, tarn ferreus, ut ttneat se ? Juv. 

— " Who can be so tolerant of the iniquities of the city, 

so steeled, as to contain himself? " 

Quis neget arduis 
1'ronos reldbi posse vivos 
Jtfont7bus, et Tiberim reverti ? Hor. 
— " Who can deny, that rivers may flow upwards to the 
mountains, and that the Tiber can be turned back ? " 
Said in derision of an argument which cannot be supported 
upon natural grounds. 

Quis nescit primam esse historian legem ne quid falsi dlcere 
audeat ? Cic. — " Who knows not that it is the first law 
of history not to dare to say anything that is false?" 

Quis non odit viirios, leves, fufiles ? Cic. — " Who does not 
dislike the fickle, frivolous, and trifling? " 

Quis novus hie nostris successit sed"ibus hospes ? 

Quam sese ore f evens ! VlRO. 

— " What think you of this wondrous guest who has come 
to our abode ? In mien how graceful he appears ! " 



QUI—QOO. 383 

Quis potest ant corporis Jirmitdti, aut fortunes st\ibilitati con- 
fldPre ? Crc. — " Who is there that can have confidence 
in the strength of his body, or the stability of his for- 
tune ? " 

Quis scit an adjiciant hodiernee crastina summce 

Tempnra Dl sPpPri ? Hor. 

— " Who knows whether the gods above will add a morrow 
to the existence of to-day ? " 

Quis talia fando 

TempPret a lacrymis ? VlRG. 

— " Who, in recounting such misfortunes, can refrain from 
tears ? " 

Quis ttdPrit Graechos de seditione querentes ? Juv. — " Who 
could endure the Gracchi complaining of sedition ? " The 
Gracchi were tribunes of Home, and demagogues concern- 
ed in every seditious movement of the people. The quo- 
tation has the same meaning as Clodius accusat moechos. 

Quisnam igltur liber ? Sapiens sibi qui imperiosus ; 

Quern neqae paupPries, neque mors, neque vincula terrent ; 
Jtesponsdre cupfdlmbus, contemnPre honores 
Fortis, et in seipso totus teres atque rotundus. Hor. 
— " Who then is free ? The wise man who has dominion 
over himself ; whom neither poverty, nor death, nor chains 
affright ; resolute in checking his appetites, and in con- 
temning honours ; perfect in himself, polished and round 
as a globe." 

Quisque suos patbnur Manes. VlRG. — " We each of us 

have to put up with his own destiny." 

Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Didnam. — " If a man 
is in love with a frog, he will think his frog a very Diana." 
A mediaeval saying. 

Quo annuo. — " With what mind," or intention. The crimi- 
nality of an act greatly depends upon the animus with 
which it was committed. 

Quo bene aepisti, sic pede semper eas. Ovid, — "Mayest thou 
always proceed well in the path which thou hast commenced 
so well to tread." 

Quo fata trahunt retrdhuntque , sequdmur. Vibo. — 

" Wherever the fates lead us, let us follow." Let us sub- 
mit to the decrees of Providence. 

Quo jure. Law Term. — " By what right." 



8S4, QUO. 

Quo jure, qudque injuria. Ter. — "Whether right or wbethei 

wrong." " By hook or by crook." 
Quo major gloria, eo propior invidice est. Liv. — " Tlie 

greater the glory, the nearer it is to envy." 
Quo me cunque rapit tempestas, dt'ftror hospes. Hor. — See 

ATullius aiUUctun, &c. 
Quo mihi Jbrtilnas, si non concidltur nti ? IIor. — " Of 

what use is fortune to me, if 1 am not permitted to enjoy 

it ? " 
Quo more pyris vesci Calaber jubet hospes. Hor. — 

" After the manner in which a Calabrian invites his guest 

to feed on pears." Pears so abounded in Calabria, that 

hogs were fed with them. Applicable to those who would 

force on you that which is of little value and for which 

you have no liking. 
Quo nihil majus mPliusve terris. Hor. — " Than which there 

is nothing greater or more august on earth." 
Quo non ars ptnUrat ? Discunt Idcrymdre decenter. Ovid. 
— " To what point does not art proceed ? Some even study 

how to weep with grace." 
Quo plus sunt potce, plus sitiuntur aqua. Ovid. — "The 

more water we drink, the more we thirst." — The more we 

have, the more we want. A simile derived from the 

dropsy. 
Quo quisque stultior, eo magis insolescit. — " The more foolish 

a man is, the more insolent he becomes." 
Quo res cunque cadent, unum et commune periclum, 

Una salus ambobus erit. Viro. 

— " However things may turn out, we shall share one 

common danger, enjoy the same security." 
Quo ruitis generosa domus? male credUur hosti, 

Simplex nobilitas, perft da tela cave. Ovid. 

— " Whither rush ye, high-born house ? It is unsafe to 

trust a foe. Unsuspecting nobles, beware of the weapons 

of treachery." 
Quo semel est imbuta recens servdbit odurem 

Testa diu. Hor. 

— " A cask will long preserve the flavour with which, when 

new, it was once impregnated." Early youth is especially 

susceptible of impressions for good or for bad. 
Quo tamen adversi* jlucftbus ire paras? Ovid. — " Whitbel 



GUO. 38J5 

then do you prepare to go against the tide of circum- 
stances ? 

•— — Qwo tendis inertem, 

Bex periture,fugam ? nescis heu, perdite ! nescis 
Quern fugias ; hostes incurris, dumfugis host em. 
Incidis in Scyllam cupiens viture Charybdim. 

Philip Gualtter. 
— " Whither, unfortunate king, dost thou direct thy un- 
availing flight ? Thou knowest not, alas ! doomed man, 
whom to fly ; while thou fliest from one foe thou art 
running into the hands of another. Thou fallest into Scylla 
while endeavouring to escape Charybdis." See Incidit 
in, &c. 

Quo tmeam vultus mutant em Prbtea nodo ? Hoit. — " In 
what noose shall I hold this Proteus, who is always chang- 
ing his countenance ? " How confine to one point the 
man who is always shifting his ground of argument ? 

Quo tua non possunt qffendi pectora facto ; 

Forsltan hoc alio judlce crimen erit. Ovid. 

— " Perhaps the commission of that by which your own 

feelings are not hurt, may be a fault in the opinion of 

another." 

Quoad hoc. — " Thus far." " Quoad hoc, I agree with you." 

Quocunque asplcias, nihil est nisi pontus et aer ; 

Nfiblbus hie tihri/dus,Jluctibus ille minax. Ovid. 
— " Whichever way you look, there is nothing but sea and 
air ; the latter laden with clouds, the former threatening 
with billows." 

Quocunque nomine gaudet. — " In whatever name he rejoices." 
By whatever name he may be known. 

——Quocunque volent, aritmum auditoris agunto. Hon. — 
" Let them lead just as they please the passions of the 
audience." The great object of the poet and the orator. 

Quod absurdum est. — "Which is absurd." See JRcduciio ad 
absurdum. 

Quod alibi diminutum, exequatur alibi. Prov. — " That 
which is curtailed one way may be made up another." 
See Non omnia, &c. 

Quod avertat Deus ! — " Which may God forbid ! " Or, more 
tersely, "God forbid !" 

2o 



860 QUO. 

Quod caret alternd requie durdblh non est. Ovid. — " Thai 
which is without alternate repose is not durable. " 

Quod certaniinibus ortum, ultra metam durat. Vell. Pater. 
— " What is begun in strife lasts beyond our rah-ula- 
tions." Contention should if possible be avoided while 
there is still room for negotiation. 

Quod cessat ex reditu, frugalitdte supplcdtur. Pliny the 
Younger. — " Let that which is wanting in our revenue be 
made up by frugality." 

Quod cibus est dliis, aliis est atre venerium. — " What is food 
for some is black poison to others." Tastes differ. " W hat 
is one man's meat is another man's poison." 

Quod cuique temporis ad vivendum datur, eo debet esse con- 
tentus. Cic. — " Each ought to be content with the period 
of existence allotted." 

Quod de quoque viro, et cui dicas, scepe caveto. — " Be con- 
stantly on your guard to whom you speak and what you 
say." 

Quod decet honestum est, et quod honestum est decet. Cic. 
— " Whatever is becoming is honourable, and whatever is 
honourable is becoming." 

Quod defertur non aufertur. — " That which is deferred is not 
relinquished." " Omittance is no quittance." Shaksp. 

Quod erat demonstrandum. — " Which was to be proved." 
Abbreviated Q. E. D., and generally appended to the 
Theorems of Euclid. 

Quod erat faciendum. — " Which was to be done." Ab- 
breviated Q. E. P., and appended to the Problems of 
Euclid. 

Quod est violentum non est durdbtle. Prov. — " That which 
is violent cannot last long." 

Quod huic qfficium, qua laus, quod decus erit tanti quod 
adipisci cum dolore corporis velit, qui dolorem summum 
malum sibi persuasPrit ? quam porro quis ignominiam, quam 
turpitudtnem non pertiilerit, ut effugiat dolorem, si id sum- 
mum malum esse decrevit ? Cic. — " What office, what 
commendation, what honours, will be so highly valued by 
him who considers pain the greatest of evils, that he will 
earn them at the expense of bodily pair. ? And what 
ignominy, what baseness, wvJ he not submit to, merely 



QUO. 387 

to a\oid pain, if he is of opinion that it is the greatest 

of ills ? " 
Quod in corde sobrii, id in lingua ebrii. JProv. — " What a 

man keeps in his breast when sober is at his tongue's 

end when drunk." See In vino, &c. 
Quod latet ignbtum est, ignbti nulla cupldo. Ovtd. — " That 

which lies hid is unknown ; for what is unknown there is 

no desire." " What the eye sees not, the heart rues not." 
Quod licet ingrdtum est, quod non licet, dcrius urit. — Ovid. 

— " What is accessible is but little esteemed, what is 

denied is eagerly desired." 
Qvod male fers, assuesce ; feres bene. Multa vetustas 

Lenit. Ovid. 

— " What you endure with impatience, accustom yourself 

to ; and you will endure it with patience. Time makes 

many things endurable." See Optimum elige, &c. 
Quod medicamenta morbis exhibent, hoc jura negotii's. — " Laws 

are of the same use in the affairs of men, as medicines in 

diseases." 
Quod medicbrum est, 

Promittunt medlci, iractant fabrllia fabri. Hok. 

— " Physicians undertake what belongs to physicians, 

mechanics handle the tools of mechanics." 
Quod munus reipublicce qfferre majus meliusve possunws, quam 

si docemus atque erudimus juventutem ? Cic. — " What 

greater benefit can we confer upon the state, or what 

more valuable, than if we teach and train up the young f " 
Quod naturdlis ratio inter omnes homines constituit, vocdtur 

jus gentium. — " That which natural reason has established 

among all men, is called the law of nations." 
Quod nescias damndre, summa est temPritas. — " It is extreme 

presumption to condemn what you do not understand." 
Quod nimis mlstri volunt, hoc facile credunt. — " That which 

the wretched anxiously wish for, they are ready to be- 
lieve." 
Quod non opus est, asse ca-'um est. — " What is not wanted 

is dear at a penny." A saying of Cato, quoted by Seneca. 
Quod non potest, vult posse qui nimium potest. Sen. — " He 

who is able to do too much, wishes to do more than he is 

able." The thirst for power becomes the more insatiate 

the more it is gratified. 

I o 9 



398 QUO. 

Quod nunc ratio est, impetus ante fait. Ovid. — " "What 

is now an act of reason was an impulse before." 

Quod optanti Div urn pr omit t ere nemo 
Auderet, volvenda dies, en ! attiilit ultro. Vikg. 
— " That which not one of the gods would have ventured 
to promise to your supplications, behold! the revolving 
day has spontaneously bestowed." Said of some unlooked- 
for piece of good fortune. 

Quod petiit spernit, repetit quod nuper omlsit. Hon. — " What 
he formerly sought, he now despises, and seeks again that 
which he lately rejected." A description of the unsettled 
mind of a wayward and capricious man. 

Quod petis hie est ; 

Est Ulubris. Hon. 

— " What you seek is here — it is at Ulubrffi." Happiness 
may be enjoyed even in the meanest of places. 

Quod petis, id sane invisum est acldumque duobus. Hor. — 
" What you ask for is detestable and nauseous to two 
other persons." Said of an author, desirous, but unable, 
to please the tastes of three different readers. 

Quod prastdre potes, ne bis promiseris ulli ; 

Ne sis verbosus, dum vis urbdnus haberi. Cato. 
— " Promise not twice to any man the service you may be 
able to render him ; and be not loquacious, if you wish to 
be esteemed for your kindness." 

Quod ptideat socium prudens eel/ire memento. — " What shames 
thy friend, be prudent and conceal." 

Quod quisque vitet, nunquam homlni satis 

Cautum est in horas. Hoe. 

— " Man is never sufficiently on his guard from hour to 
hour what to avoid." 

Quod ratio nequiit, scepe sandvit mora. Sen. — " Time and pa- 
tience have often cured what reason could not." 

Quod satis est cui contingit, nihil amplius optet. Hob. — 
"He whose lot it is to have enough should wish for 
nothing more." 

Quod scis, nihil prodest : quod nescis, multum obest. Cic. — 
** What you know profits you nothing, what you don't 
know is a great loss." An instance of Antithesis. 

Quod sequltur,fugio ; quod fugit, usque sequor. Ovid. — "What 
follows me, I fly; what flies me, I continue to pursue." 



QUO. 389 

Quod si deficiant vires, auddcia certe 

Laws erit ; in magnis, et voluisse sat est. Propeiit. 
— " Even though the strength should fail, still boldness 
shall have its praise ; in great undertakings it is enough 
to have attempted." 

Quod si tantus amor menti, si tanta cupido est, 

Et insr'ino juvat indulgPre labori, 

Acclpe quae per -agenda prius. VlRG. 

— " But if so great a passion, so ardent a love of enter- 
prise, influences your mind, and you delight to undertake 
a task so desperate, hear what must first be done." 

Quod sis esse velis, nihilque nialis. Mart. — " Wish to be 
what you are, and consider nothing preferable." 

Quod sors feret, feremus aequo ammo. Ter. — " Whatever 
fortune may bring, let us bear it with ecpianimity." 

Quod supra nos, nihil ad nos. Prov. — " That which is 
above us is nothing to us." Originally a saying of So- 
crates, intimating that we ought not to attempt to pry 
into mysteries beyond our comprehension. See Qua 
supra, &c. 

Quod tarn grande sophos clamat tibi turba togdta, 

Non tu, Pomponi, ccena diserta tua est. Mart. 

— " The reason why the gown-clad multitude receives you, 
Pomponius, with such loud plaudits is, not that you, but 
that your dinner, speaks with eloquence." 

Quod tantis Bomdna manus contexPrit annis, 

Prodltor unus inermi, angusto tempore vertit. Claud. 
— " What the Roman hand constructed in so many years, a 
single traitor, unarmed, overthrew in one short moment." 
A censure against Rufinus. 

Quod tibi fieri non vis, altPri ne fPcPris. — "Do not unto 
another what you would not have done unto, yourself." 

Quod verum, simplex, sincPrumque est, id natnrce homtnis est 
aptisslmum. Cic. — " That which is true, honest, and sin- 
cere, is most congenial to the nature of man." 

Quod vide. — " Which see." Often written q. v. 

Quod vidimus testamur.—" We testify that we have seen." 
1 John iii. 11. 

Quod vile est carum, quod carum est vile, putdto ; 

Sic tibi nee narcus, nee avdrus hnbPbPris ulli. Cato. 



890 QUO. 

— " Consider that what is inferior is dear, and what is 
dear is inferior ; so you will neither appear stingy to your- 
self, nor be considered avaricious by otners." 
Quod volunt hdmmes, se bene telle putant. — " What men wish 

for, they think themselves right in wishing for." 
Quod vosjus cogit, id voluntdte impUret. Tee. — " That which 
the law would compel you to do, let him obtain as of your 
own free will." Concede with a good grace that which 
the law will not allow you to withhold. 

Quodcunque aWgerit, si qua est studiosa sinistri, 

Ad vitium mores instruet inde suos. Otid. 

— " Whatever comes in a woman's way, if she is at all 
inclined to do wrong, she will strain to her vicious pur- 
poses." 

Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi. Hoe. — " What- 
ever you show me in such a manner, I detest and disbe- 
lieve." Said with reference to the exhibition on the stage 
of shocking and disgusting objects. 

Quodttbet. — " Whatever you please." A farrago or miscel- 
lany. This name is also given to a pot-pourri, or Bong, 
composed of scraps or verses of other songs, much after 
the fashion of the Cento of the later Eoman poets. 

Quomodo habeas, illud refert ; jurene an injurid. Plaut. — 
" The question is, In what way you get it, whether right- 
fully or wrongfully." 

Quondam etiam victis redit in prcecordia virtus. VlEG. — 
" Sometimes valour will return even into the breasts of the 
conquered." When it is prompted by despair. 

Quoniam diu vixisse denegdtur, illiquid facidmus quo possimus 
ostendere nos vixisse. Cic. — " As length of life is denied 
us, let us do something by which we may show that wo 
have lived." 

Quoniam id fieri quod vis non potest, 

Velis id quod possit. Tee. 

— " As that cannot be done which you desire, wish for 
something that can be done." 

Quoniam quidem circumventus ab inimlcis prceceps agor, incen- 
dium meum ruind restinguam. Sall. — " Since, then, I am 
so beset by foes and hurried on to destruction, I -will 
extinguish the flame in which I perish by their ruin." 



QUO. 391 

From the speech of Catiline to the senate, when accused 
by them of conspiring against the state. 

Quorum aemuldri exoptat negligentiam 

Potius quam ipsorum obscuram diligentiarn. Ter. 

— " "Whose carelessness (of style) he prefers to emulate, 

rather than the laboured abstruseness of the others." 

Quorum animus meminisse horret luctuque refilgit. Virg.— - 
"At the remembrance of which my soul shudders, and 
has shrunk back with grief." 

Quorum pars causas, et res, et nomma quceret ; 

Pars rPferet, quamvis noverit ipsa parum. Ovid. 
— " Some will be making inquiries as to the reasons, the 
circumstances, and the names ; some again will be explain- 
ing, although they themselves know but little about it." 

Quorum pars magna /ui. Virg. — See Quceque ipse, &c. 

Quos Deus vult perdere dementat prius. — " Those whom God 
has a mind to ruin he first deprives of their senses." 
Aptly applied to persons whose obstinacy, or pride, leads 
them into errors portentous of their fall. See At Damon, 
&c, and Quern Jupiter, &c. 

Quos ego Virg. — " "Whom I " will chastise. A 

good illustration of the figure Aposiopesis. 

Quos Me timorum 
Maximus haud urget lethi metus : inde ruendi 
Inferrum mens prona viris, animceque capdces 

Mortis. Lucan. 

— "The dreal of death, that greatest of fears, does not 
influence them : hence they are inspired to rush upon the 
sword, and are ever ready for death." 

Quos nunc perscr'ibere longum est. — "Whom it would be 

tedious just now to enumerate." See Cum multis, &c. 

Quot capitum vivunt, tottdem studiorum 

Millia, Hob. 

— " As is the number of men who exist, so is the diversity 
of their pursuits." 

Quot homines, tot sententice. Ter. — " So many men, so 
many minds." See the preceding, and Denique non, 
&c. 

Quot servi, tot hostes. Sen. — " As many servants, so many 
enemies." Every servant you keep has an opportunity of 
becoming your enemy. 



Ita QUO— BAD. 

Qitotldie 
Prldie caveat, nefaciat quod plgeat postridie. Plavt. 
— " Let each man take care not to do to-day what he inaj 
regret to-morrow." 

—^Quoties Jlenti Thesiius heros 

Siste /nudum, dixit, neque enim fortuna querenda 
Sola tua est ; similes aliorum resplce casus, 

Mitius ista feres. Ovid. 

— " How often did the hero, the son of Theseus say to hei 
as she wept, ' Restrain thy grief ; for thy lot is not the 
only one to be lamented ; consider the like calamities o1 
others, thou wilt then bear thine own better.' " 

Quotiescumque gradum Jades, toties tibi tudrum virtutu//; 
vrniat in mentem. Cic. — " As often as you make a step 
so often let your merits occur to your mind." The word* 
addressed by his mother to Spurius Carvilius, who hac 
been rendered lame by a wouna received in battle. 

Quousque tandem abuttre patientid nostrd? Cic. — "How 
long, pray, will you abuse our patience ? " The beginning 
of Cicero's first Philippic against Catiline. 

Quum labor extudPrit fasti dia, siccus, indnis, 

Sperne cibum vilem ; nisi Hymettia mella Falerno 

Ne blbPris diluta. Hoe. 

— " When exercise has worked off squeamishness, dry anc 
hungry as you are, then despise plain food; and don'1 
drink anything but Hymettian honey qualified witl 
Falernian wine." Said ironically, of course. 

Quum sunt partium jura obscura, reo potius favendum est quan 
auctori. Law Max. — " When the rights of the parties art 
doubtful, favour must be shown to the defendant rathei 
than the complainant." 



E. 

M. I. P., for Sequiescat in pace. — "May he rest in peace." 

These initials frequently terminate the epitaph of person* 

of the Roman Catholic persuasion. 
Kadit usque ad cutem. Prov. — " He shaves close to th< 

skin." Applied to a person who is rigorously exact- 

ing. 



RAM— EAE. 393 

Rami fellcia poma ferentes. Ovid. — " Branches bear- 
ing beauteous fruit." 

Rapldus montdno Jliiniine torrens 

Sternit agros, sternit sata laeta, boumque labores, 

Rrcscipitesque trahit sylvas. Vino. 

— " The raging torrent of the mountain-stream sweeps 
over the fields, levels the smiling crops and the labours of 
the oxen, and carries headlong the trees of the forest." 

Mara avis in terris, nigroque similltma cygno. Ovid. — " A 
bird rarely seen on earth, and very like a black swan." 
A thing so utterly unknown in those times, that it was 
supposed not to exist. The first four words are often 
used ironically. 

Rara est ddeo concordia formce 

Atque pudicitice. Ju V. 

— " So rare is the union of beauty and virtue." Beauty 
is greatly exposed to the arts of temptation, which in the 
corrupt age of Juvenal were exercised with almost uni- 
versal success. 

Sara fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Lucan. — 
" Faith snd piety are rarely found among the men who 
follow the camp." This is a severe, and it is to be hoped 
undeserved, censure against the military profession. 

Rara quidem virtus, quam non fortuna gubernat. Ovid. — 
" Rare indeed is that virtue which fortune does not go- 
vern." 

Rara temporum felicitate, ubi sent'ire qua velis, et quae sentias 
dlcere licet. Tacit. — " Such was the uncommon happiness 
of the times, that you might think what you would and 
speak what you thought." A description of the freedom 
and happiness enjoyed by the Roman empire in the reigns 
of Nerva and Trajan. 

Rari nances in gurgtte vasto. Virg. — "A few swim- 
ming here and there in the vasty deep." A description 
of sailors endeavouring to escape from shipwreck ; but 
sometimes applied to literary works, in which a few happy 
thoughts may be found here and there amid an ocean of 
nonsense. See Apparent rari, &c. 

Rari quippe boni ; numero vix sunt totldem quot 
Tliebdrum portce, vel d/vttis ostia Nili. Juv. 

— " Few indeed are the good ; their number is scarce so 



8i)i RAE— BE. 

many as the gates of Thebes, or the mouths of fertilizing 
Kile." The gates of Thebes in Egypt Mere one hundred 
in number, those of Thebes in Boeotia seven. 

Raro antecedent em scelestum 

Deseruit pede poena claudo. Hor. 

— "Justice has rarely, with halting foot, failed to over- 
take the evil-doer in his flight." 

Earns enim ferine sensus communis in UJd 

Fortund. Jut. 

— " Common sense is seldom found with great fortune." 
Men when suddenly elevated are apt to lose their 
senses. 

Sarus sermo Mis, et magna libido tacendi. Juv. — "They 
speak but seldom, and show a great love of silence." Said 
with reference to men who affect a silent and solemn (K-- 
portment, as indicative of wisdom and solid sense : copy- 
ists of Lord Burleigh's expressive nods. 

Riitio et aucturitas, duo clarissima mundi lumina. Coke. — 
"Eeason and authority, the two brightest lights of the 
world." 

Ratio et consilium propria? ducts artes. Tacit. — " Thought 
and deliberation are the proper qualifications of a general." 

Ratio et ordtio conciliant inter se homines. Neque ulld re 
longius absiimus a naturd ferdrum. ClC. — " Keason and 
speech unite men to each other. Nor is there anything in 
which we differ more entirely from the brute creation." 

Ratio just ifica. — "The reason which justifies." 

Ratio quasi quaedam lux lumenque vita?. ClC. — " Reason is, 
as it were, the guide and light of life." 

Ratio suasoria. — " The reason which persuades." 

Rdtiondblle tempus. — " A reasonable time." 

Re infectd. — " The business being unfinished." His object 
being unaccomplished. 

Re ipsd rPpperi, 

Facilitate nihil esse hornlni melius neque dementia. Teb. 
— " I have found by experience that there is nothing bet- 
ter for a man than an easy temper and complacency." 

Re opitulandum non verbis. Frov. — " We must assist in 
deeds, not in words." 

Re secundd fortis, dubid fugax. Piled. — "In prosperity 
courageous, in danger timid." 



EEB— REC. 395 

Rebus angustis aninwsus at que 
Jfbrtis appare ; sapienter idem 
Gontrahes vento niniium secundo 

Turglda vela. Hob. 

— " In adversity, appear full of resolution and undaunted ; 
in like manner prudently reef your sails, when too much 
distended by a prosperous gale." 

Rebus in angustis facile est contemntlre mortem ; 

Fortlter illefacit qui miser esse potest. Mart. 

— " In adversity it is easy to show contempt for death ; 
he acts with fortitude, who can endure being wretched." 
Suicide is cowardice : 

"The coward dares to die, the brave live on." 

Rebus secundis etiam egregios duces insolescere. Tacit. — 
" In the moments of prosperity, even the best of generals 
are apt to be too much elated." 

Hebus sic stantibus. — " Such being the state of things." 

Recenti mens trepldat metu. Hoe. — " My mind is still 
agitated with terror." 

Recepto 

Dulce mini fur ere est am'tco. Hob. 

— " It is delightful to launch out on receiving my friend 

once more." 

Recipiunt foeminoe sustentacula a nobis. — "Women receive 
support from us." Motto of the Patten-makers' Com- 
pany. 

Recta actio non erit, nisi recta fuit voluntas, ah Tide enim est 
actio. Rursus, voluntas non erit recta, nisi habitus dnlmi 
rectus fuerit, ab hoc enim est voluntas. Sen. — " An action 
will not be right unless the intention is right, for from 
it springs the action. Again, the intention cannot be 
right unless the state of the mind is right, for from it 
proceeds the intention." 

Jiftclius vives, Llclni, neque altum 

Semper urgendo, neque, dum procellas 
Cautus horrescis, nimium premendo 

Littus inlquum. Hob. 

— " You will live more prudently, Licinius, by neither al- 
ways keeping out at sea, nor, while you are cautiously in 
dread of storms, by hugging too much the hazardour 
bhore." A lesson to avoid extremes. 



396 EEC— EED. 

Rectus in curid. Law Phrase. — " Upright in the court.** 
The state of a man who comes into a court of justice with 
clean hands. 

Recusdtio judlcis. — "Exception taken to the judge." 

Jteddas amicis tempdra, uxori voces, 

Arilmum relaxes, otium des corpori. I'HJED. 
— " Give time to your friends, your leisure to your wif^ 
relax your mind, and refresh your body." Lines ad- 
dressed to a man immersed in business. 

Redde vicem mPrltis ; grato licet esse. Ovid. — "Make 

some return for mv kindness; you may now be grate- 
ful." 

ReddPre persona scit converxientia cuique Hon. — " ITe knows 
how to assign to each person a suitable part." He knows 
what best suits each character. Said of a dramatic 
writer. 

ReddPre qui voces jam scit puer, et pede certo 
Signat humum, gestit paribus colliidPre, et iram 
Colli git ac ponit tPmPre, et mutdtur in horas. Hon. 
— "The child who just knows how to talk and to walk, 
delights to play with his equals, is easily provoked and 
appeased, and changes with every hour." 

Reddite deposit urn ; piPtas suafcedPra servet ; 

Fraus absit ; viicuas ccedis habPte manus. Ovid. 

— " Restore the pledge intrusted ; let affection observe 

her duties ; be there no fraud ; keep your hands free from 

bloodshed." 

RPdeat mlsPris, abeat fort una superbis. Hor. — " May 

fortune revisit the wretched, and forsake the proud!" 

Redire ad nuces. — " To return to the nuts." To become a 
child again. 

Redit agricolis labor actus in orbem, 

Atque in se sua per vestigia volvitur annus. Vibo. 
— " The farmer's toil returns in a circle, and the year re- 
volves in its former footsteps." 

Redolet lucernam. — " It smells of the lamp." See Olet 
lucernam. 

Reductio ad absurdum. — " A reduction to an absurdity." A 
phrase used in logical or mathematical reasoning, when 
the adversary is reduced to submission by proving the ab- 
surdity of his position. 



KEF— REG-. 397 

Refricdre cicatncem. — " To open a wound afresh." " To rip 
up an old sore." To revert to a former grievance. 

Rege incolumi, mens omnibus una est ; 
Amisso, rupere Jidem, constructaque mella 
Diripuere ipsce, et crates solvere favorum. Virg. 
— " While the king is safe one mind animates all ; when 
he is dead they dissolve their union, and themselves tear 
to pieces the fabric of their honey, and demolish the 
structure of their combs." From this circumstance, Virgil 
expresses his opinion that bees are endowed with some- 
thing more than instinct. The presiding bee was, by the 
ancients, erroneously called the "king." 

lieges dicuntur multis urgere culullis, 

Et torquire mero, quern perspexisse laborent, 

An sit amicitid dignus. Hoe. 

— " Certain kings are said to ply with many a cup, and to 
test with wine, the man whom they are anxious to prove, 
whether he be worthy of their friendship." 

Ri-gia, crede mihi, res est, succurrere lapsis. Ovid. — " 'Tis a 
kingly act, believe me, to succour the distressed." 

Rpgibus boni quam mali suspectibres sunt, semper que his alima 
virtus formidolbsa est. Sall. — " Good men are more sus- 
pected by kings than bad ones ; and distinguished virtues 
in other men are always to them a ground of apprehen- 
sion." When a man has no rivals in station, he is apt to 
become suspicious of those who are his successful rivals in 
the practice of virtue. 

Rrglbus hie mos est ; ubi equos mercantur opertos 
Inspiciunt ; ne si facies, ut scepe, decora 
Molli fulta pede est, emptbrem indncat hiantem, 
Quod pulchrce dunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix. Hor. 
— " This is the custom with men of fortune when they 
purchase horses, they inspect them covered ; that if, as 
often happens, a fine forehand is supported by a tender 
hoof, it may not deceive the buyer, eager for the bargain, 
because the buttocks are handsome, the head smaii, and 
the neck stately." 

Regis ad exemplar totus compbrutur orbis. — " The whole com- 
munity is regulated by the example of the king." See 
Componitur orbis, &c. 

Regium donum. — " The royal gift." A sum of money granted 



398 BEG— REM. 

yearly by the Crowu to the Presbyterian clergy of Ireland 
is so called. 

Regius morbus. — "The royal disease." In the classical au- 
thors this means the jaundice, but when used by mediaeval 
writers, it signifies the malady now known as the " king's 
evil." 

Regndre nolo, liber ut non sim mihi. PhjED. — " I would not 
be a king to lose my liberty." 

Regula ex jure, non jus ex regula sforitur. Law Max. — " The 
practice is taken from the law, not the law from the prac- 
tice." 

liegum eequdbat opes anlmis ; serdque revertens 

Node domum, ddpibus mensas onernbat inemptis. Viro. 
— " He equalled the wealth of kings in contentment of 
mind ; ana at night returning home, would load his board 
with unbought dainties." A description of the happy life 
of the old man Corycius. 

liegum frlicitas multis miscitur malis. — " The happiness of 
kings is alloyed by many evils." 

Rei mandate omnes sapientes primtim prarvorti decet. Plaut, 
— " It behoves all wise men to give their first attention to 
the business intrusted to them." 

Reipubticce forma lauddri facttius quam evenire, et si evenit, 
haud diuturna esse potest. Tacit. — " It is more easy to 
praise a republican form of government than to establish 
it ; and when it is established it cannot be of long dura- 
tion." So far as Europe is concerned, the historian seems 
to be right. 

Reldta rlftro. — " I tell the tale as it was told to me." I do 
not vouch for its truth. 

Relegdre bona religionlbus. Law Phrase. — " To bequeath 
one's property for pious purposes." 

Relictd non bene parmuld. Hoe. — " Ingloriously leaving 

my shield behind." Horace confesses that he did this at 
the battle of PJiilippi, when he saved himself by flight 
See Tanquam Argivum, &c. 

Religentem esse oportet, religiosum nefas. Aul. GrELL. from 
an ancient poem. — " A man should be religious, not super- 
stitious." A play upon the resemblance of the two words. 

Rem acu tHlgit. — " He has touched the matter with a 
needle." " He has hit the right nail on the head." 



KEM-EES. 399 

• ■ - Rem, facias rem ; 

Si possis recte, si non, quocunque modo rem. Hoe. 
— " Wealth, acquire wealth ; by honest means if you oan, 
if not, by any means gain wealth." " Get money, my 
son, get money, honestly if you can, but get money." 

Rem tibi quam nosces aptam, dimiitire noli ; 

Fronte capilldtd, post est occdsio calva. Cato. 
— " Lose not the thing that thou knowest to be suitable 
for thee ; Opportunity has locks before, but behind is 
bald." See Occasio prima, &c. 

j Hem tu strenuus auge. Hon. — " Exert every endeavour 

to increase your property." 

Rcmis velisque. Prov. — "With oars and sails." Using 
every possible endeavour. " With tooth and nail." 

Renovet prist ma bella. — " Let him fight his battles over 
again." 

Repardbllis adsonat echo. Pers. — " Repeating echo 

resounds." 

Repente dives nemo factus est bonus. Syr. — " No good man 
ever became rich all of a sudden." Fortunes rapidly made 
are often owing to advantage being taken of others. 

RZperit Deus nocentem. Prov. — " God finds out the guilty 
man." Our sins " come home to us at last." 

RPquiem ceternam dona eis, Domme. — " Grant them eternal 
rest, Lord." The beginning of the Requiem, or chaunt 
for the dead, of the Romish Church. 

Requiescat in pace. — "May he rest in peace." A common 
inscription on tomb-stones. It is sometimes used ironi- 
cally in reference to the departed greatness of persona 
dismissed from office. See R. I. P. 

Rerum ipsdrum cognitio vera, e rebus ipsis est. Jul. Scalig. 
— " The true knowledge of things must be derived from 
the things themselves." Mastery of a subject can only 
be acquired by attentive study and examination. 

Res amlcos invenit. Plaut. — " Money finds friends." 

R es angusta domi. Jut. — " Narrowed circumstances 
at home ; " limited means. " The res angusta domi obliges 
him to live in retirement." An euphemism for poverty. 

Res est blanda canor ; discant cantdre puellce. Ovil). — 
" Music is an insinuating thing : let the fair learn to 
sing." 



iOO RES 

Res est sacra miser. Ovid. — "A man in distress ia 

a sacred object." Respect is due to the sufferings of the 

wretched. 
Res est solliciti plena timoris amor. Ovid. — " Love is full of 

anxious fears." 
Res humdna inst allies sunt, et nihil habent firmitatis. ClC. 

— " Human affairs are unstable, and have in them nothing 

lasting." 
Res in cardtne est. Prov. — " The business is on the hinge." 

It is now in suspense, but will soon be terminated one 

way or the other. 
Res judicata. — " A thing adjudged." A matter decided. 
Res rusttca sic est, si unatn rem sero fecPris omnia opera sero 

fades. Cato. — "The nature of husbandry is such, that 

if vou do one thing too late, you will do everything too 

late." 
Res sunt humdnce flibrte lildibrium. — " Human affairs are a 

mournful jest." 
Res ubi magna nitet. Hob. — " Where an ample for- 
tune shines." Where splendid circumstances are evident. 
Res unlus cetdtis. — " A thing of only one age." A phrase 

employed in the law to denote a legal provision, which 

cannot extend to the circumstances of more than one 

generation. 
Respice Jinem. — " Look to the end." " Respect your end." 

Comedy of Errors, act iv. sc. 4. 
ResplcPre exemplar vita morumque jubebo 

Doctum imitdtorem, et veras hinc ducere voces. Hob. 

— " I would direct the learned imitator to study closely 

nature and manners, and thence to draw his expressions to 

the life." 
Respondeat superior. Law Max. — " The principal must 

answer." The master must answer for the acts of his 

servant when acting as such. 
Respiie quod non es. Pees. — " Reject what you are 

not." Assume not a character to which you have no just 

claim. 
HCestat iter coelo : ccelo tentdblmus ire ; 

Da vPniam ccepto, Jupiter alte, meo. Ovid. 

— " There remains a path through the heavens ; through 

the heavens we will attempt to go Great Jupiter, grant 



RET— RID. 401 

pardon to my design." The words of Daodalus, when 
about to make his escape on wings from the Cretan Laby- 
rinth. 

Uete non tendltur acclpitri neque milvio. Ter. — " The net is 
not spread for the hawk or the kite." 

Reverendo admodum. — " To the very reverend." 
Revocdte ariimos, moestumque timorem 

Mitt/te. Tiro. 

— "Resume your courage, and cast off this desponding 
fear." 

Bex datur propter regnum, non regnum propter regent. Po- 
tentia non est nisi ad bonum. Law Max. — " A king is 
given for the sake of the kingdom, not the kingdom for 
the sake of the king. Power is only given for the public 
good." 

Rex est major singulis, minor universis. Bracton. — " The 
king is greater than any individual, but less than the 
whole community." 

Rex est qui mPtuit nihil ; 

Rex est qui cupit nihil. Sen. 

— " He is a king who fears nothing ; he is a king who de- 
sires nothing." 

Rex nunquam moritur. Law Max. — " The king never dies." 
The office is supposed to be filled by his successor at the 
instant of his decease. 

— ■ — Ridentem dicitre verum 

Quid vetat ? Hon. 

— " What forbids a man to convey the truth laughingly ? h 
"Why may not truth be conveyed under the form of pleas- 
antry ? 

Ride si sapis. Mart. — " Laugh if you are wise." Enjoy 
the ridicule which is directed against the follies of the age. 
" It is good to be merry and wise." 

Ridere in stomacho. Cic. — " To laugh inwardly." " To laugh 
in one's sleeve," as we say. 

Ridet argento domus. Hor. — "The house smiles with sil- 
ver." Almost every article is of plate. 

Ridetur chordd qui semper oberrat eddem. Hor. — " He is 
laughed at who is for ever blundering on the same string." 
A man who is always harping on one subject or talking 
about himself becomes ridiculous. 
2 o 



402 RID— RUM. 

——Bidiculum acri 

Fortius ac melius magnas plerumque secat res. Hob. 

— " Ridicule often settles an affair of importance better 

and more effectually than severity." 

Bidiculus ceque nullus est, quam quando Psiirit. Plaut. — " A 
man is never so droll as when he is hungry." That is, of 
course, when he expects to satisfy his hunger by his buf- 
foonery. 

Bisu dissolvit ilia. Petbon. Aebitee. — "He bursts his 
sides with laughing." 

Bisu inept o res ineptior nulla est. Mabt. — "Nothing is 
more silly than silly laughter." 

Bisum tenedtis, amid ? Hoe. — " Can you refrain from 
laughter, my friends ? " 

Bisus abundat in ore stultorum. — " Laughter abounds in the 
mouths of fools." 

Bivalent patienter habe. Ovid. — " With patience bear a 

rival (in love)." 

Bixdtur de land, caprlnd. — " He would quarrel about a goat's 
hair." A captious, litigious person. See Alter rixa- 
tur, &c. 

Boma, tibi siiblto motlbus ibit amor. Sidon. Apollinabis. — 
" Rome, upon thee suddenly love with its commotions shall 
come." Inserted as a specimen of the Palindrome or 
Sotadic verse, a trifling composition, which reads the same 
from left to right, and from right to left. This line has 
also been attributed to Aldhelm. See another instance, 
Sacrum pin gue, &c. 

Boma Tibur ame?n, ventosus, Tibiire Bomam. Hob. — "At 
Rome I Tibur love, wind-like, at Tibur Rome." The pic- 
ture of a man who does not know his own mind, but is 
always in an unsettled state. 

Bore vixit more cieddce. Prov. — " He lived upon dew, like 
a grasshopper." Said ironically of luxurious persons, who 
pretend to be very abstemious. 

Budis indigestdque moles. Ovid. — " A rude and undi- 
gested mass." A description of Chaos ; but often quoted 
as meaning a mass of confusion. 

Bumor est sermo quidam sine ullo certo auctdre dispersus, cut 
maliqmtas initium dedit, iicrementum credulltas. Quint. 
— " Rumour is, as it were, a report spread without any 



RUM—SAC. 403 

certain author, begotten by malignity, and nourished by 
credulity." 

Rumpitur innumeris arbos uberrima pomis, 
El sublto nimice prcecipitantur opes. 

— " The most fruitful tree is weighed down by fruit innu- 
merable, and wealth too abundant is suddenly brought to 
the ground." 

Sura mini et rtgui placeant in valllbus arnnes. 

Fluniina amem sylvasque inglbrius. Vtrg. 

— " Let fields and streams, purling through the valleys, be 
my delight. Inglorious, may I court the rivers and the 
woods." 

■ -Rursum si reventum in gratiam est, 

Bis tanto amid sunt inter se quam prius. Plaut. 

— " When they become reconciled, they are twice as loving 

as they were before." 

Bus in urbe. Mart. — " Country in town." A residence 
situate in town or its vicinity, possessing many of the ad- 
vantages of the country. 'A Cit's " box." 
—Rusficus expectat dum digtuat amnis ; at ille 
Lab&twr et labetur in omne voliibttis aevum. Hor. 

— " The peasant waits until the river shall cease to flow ; 
but still it glides on, and will glide on for all time to 
come." It is vain to expect a change in the laws of 
nature. 



S. 

S. P. for Sine prole. — "Without issue." 

S. P. Q. R. — Sendtus Populusque Romdnus. — " The Eoman 
Senate and people." These initials were placed upon the 
Roman standards and public buildings. 

Sacrum pingue dabo, non macrum sacrificdbo. — " 1 will give a 
fat sacrifice, I will not make a lean offering." The line, 
read thus, is an Hexameter, and refers to Abel's sacrifice. 
Read backwards it is a Pentameter, and reads thus, " I 
will make a lean offering, I will not give a fat sacrifice," — 
in reference to that of Cain. It is of the Palindrome 
genus, and was probably composed by a poet of the middle 
ages. See Roma, tibi, &c. 

a d 2 



404 S^P. 

Scepe bibi succos, quamvis invittu, amdros 

^Eger ; et oranti mensa negdta tnihi. Ovid. 
— " Often when ill have I, though reluctantly, had to 
drink bitter potions ; and, though I begged for it, food 
was refused me." 

Scepe ego, ne btberem, viilui dormlre vidrri ; 

Dum vldeor, somno lumtna victa dedi. Ovid. 
— " Often, that I might not drink, I have wished to ap- 
pear asleep ; while I have Beemed to be so, I have surren- 
dered my overpowered eyes to slumber." 

Scepe est sub pallio sordido sapientia. ClC. — " Wisdom is 
often found under a mean cloak." 

Scepe etiam est oUtor valde opportiina locutus. Prov. — " Even 
a costermonger very often speaks to the purpose." 

Scepe exiguus mus 

Sub terris pdsuitque downs et horrea fecit. Viko. 

— "The little mouse often constructs its abode and its 

granary under ground." 

Scepe Mi dixerat Almo, 
Nata, tene linguwn ; nee tainen ilia tenet. Ovid. 
— " Often had Almo said to her, • Daughter, do hold your 
tongue;' but still she held it not." 

Scepe in conjugiis Jit noxia, cum ntmia est dos. Auson. — 
" Mischief is often the result in marriage, when the dowry 
is too large." 

Scepe in magistrum scttera redierunt sua. Sen. — " His own 
faults often recoil upon the author's head." 

Scepe ingenia calamitnte intercidunt. Ph^:d. — " Genius 

is often wasted through misfortune." 

Scepe intereunt aliis meditantes necem. — " Men often perish 
when meditating the destruction of others." The wicked 
often fall into the pit which they dig for others. 

Scepe premente Deo,fert Deus alter opem. — " Often when we 
are hard pressed by one deity, another comes to our aid." 
"When we think we are overwhelmed with misfortunes, 
"unexpected relief often comes to our rescue. 

Scepe rogdre soles qualis sim, JPrisce, futiirus, 
Sijiam lociiples, simque repente potens. 
Quern quam posse putas mores narrdre futuros ? 
hie mihi, sifias tu leo, qualis eris ? Mabt. 

— " Priscus, yem are v> out often to ask me how i wouli 



SJEP— S^EV. 405 

live, if I should become rich and be a great man all at 
once. Do you think that any one can foretell what his 
conduct will be ? Tell me, if you were to become a lion, 
what sort of one would you be ? " 

Scepe solet simllis filius esse patri ; 
Et sPqultur iPvtter filia matris iter. 

— " The son is usually wont to be like the sire ; and lightly 
does the daughter follow in her mother's footsteps." 

Scepe sonant moti glacie pendente capilli ; 

Et nitet inducto Candida barba gelu. Ovid. 
— " Full oft do the hairs rattle with the pendent icicles, 
as they move, and the white beard sparkles with the frost 
that has gathered upon it." 

Scepe stylum vertas iterum qua digna legi sint 

Scripturus. Hor. 

— " You must often correct your language if you mean to 
write anything worthy of being read a second time." 

Sape sub attrltd latitat sdpientia veste. — " Often does wisdom 
lie concealed beneath a thread-bare garment." 

Sxpe summa ingPnia in occulto latent. Plaut. — " The great- 
est talents often lie concealed." " Full many a gem of 
purest ray serene," &c. See Gfray's Elegy. 

S&pe tacens vocem verbaque vultus habet. Ovid. — " The 
silent features have often both words and expression of 
their own." 

Scepe via obllqud prastat quam tendPre recta. — " The circuit- 
ous road is often better than the direct one." The same as 
our English proverb, " The longest way about is often the 
shortest way home." 

Scepius ventis agitdtur ingens 
Pinus, et celsa graviore caste 
Decidunt turres, feriuntque summos 

Eulgura monies. Hob. 

— " The lofty pine is oftenest shaken by the winds, high 
towers fall to the earth with a heavier crash, and light- 
nings strike the summits of the mountains." The advan- 
tages of a middle station. 

Scevajussa, continuas accusdtidnes,falldces amicitias, perriiciem 
innocentium. Tacit. — " Cruel commands, continual de- 
nunciations, deceitful friendships, and the destruction ot 



406 S^V— SAL. 

the innocent." A description of the state of Home in tb* 
days of Tacitus. 

Savi inter se convmiunt ursi. Jut. — " Even savage beam 

agree among themselves." The wild beasts agree with 
others of their own species ; man alone is perpetually at 
war with his fellow-men. 

Savit amor Jerri, et scelerdta insdnia belli. Vibg. — " The 
love of arms rages, and the frenzied wickedness of war." 

Swvitque ariimis igndblle vulgus ; 

Jamque faces et saxa volant ; furor arma ministrat. Vino. 
— " The rude rabble are enraged ; and now fire-brands 
and stones are seen to fly ; rage supplies arms." A de- 
scription of a popular tumult. 

Sal Atticum. — "Attic salt." The poignancy of wit and 
brilliancy of style peculiar to the Athenian writers was 
so called by the Komans. 

Saltdbat melius quam necesse est proba. Sall. — " She danced 
better than became a modest woman." Among the Ko- 
mans it was only loose women that were expected to excel 
in this art. 

Saltat Milonius, ut semel icto 

Accessit fervor cdpUi, numerusque lucernis. Hob. 

— " Milonius begins to dance as soon aa his head is heated 

with wine, and the lights begin to multiply." 

Salus populi suprema est lex. — " The well-being of the people 
is the first great law." Said to have been derived from the 
Laws of the Twelve Tables at Eome. Aristotle has a similar 
maxim. 

Salus ubi multi consilidrii. Coke. — "In the multitude of coun- 
sellors there is safety." See Proverbs xi. 14, and xxiv. 6. 

Saluti consulere et incolwmitdti sua. ClC — " To study his 
health and his welfare." The legitimate object of a man's 
life, so long as he is observant of his duty to others. 

Salvd dignitdte. — " "Without compromising his dignity." 

Salve, magna parens. Vibg. — " All hail ! thou great 

parent! " 

Salve Pceonite larg'itor nobllis undas, 
Salve Dardanii gloria magna soli : 
Publico morborum requles, commune medentwn 
Auxilium, pr&sens numen, inempta Salus. Clai'I.. 



SAT— SAP. 407 

— " Hail ! thou noble bestower of the Pjeoniar. wave ; 1iu.il ! 
thou great glory of the Dardanian soil ; thou universal 
relief from maladies, thou common aid of the healing craft, 
propitious deity — Health ! unbought by gold." 

Salvo jure. — " Saving the right." A grant is made salvo 
jure regis, " saving the right of the king," his rights and 
prerogatives being preserved from encroachment. 

Salvo pudore. — "Modesty saved." "Without a violation of 
modesty. "With proper regard to decency. 

Salvum fac regem. — " Grod save the king ! " Salvam fac re- 
ginam. — " God save the queen ! " 

Sanctio justa,jubem honesta, et prohibens contrdria. Bracton. 
— " A just decree, enforcing what is honest, and forbidding 
the contrary." A characteristic of a good law. 

Sanctius his animal, mentisque capdcius altce, 
Dierat adhuc et quod domindri in catcra possit : 

Natus homo est. Otid. 

— " But an animated being, more holy than these, more 
fitted to receive higher faculties, and one to rule over the 
rest, was still wanting. Then man was formed." Ovid's 
account of the creation of man. 

Sanctum sanctorum. — " The holy of holies." In the Eccle- 
siastical Law the chancel of a church is so called. Com- 
monly applied to a study or private room. 

Sanctus haberi 

JustYticeque tenax,factis dictisque mereris ? 

Agnosco proccrem. Juv. 

— " If you deserve to be accounted a man of blameless 
integrity and staunch in your love of justice, both in word 
and deed, then I recognise the real nobleman." 

Sdpe.re aude. Hor. — " Dare to be wise." Adhere to 

the dictates of wisdom, in spite of fear or temptation. 
Motto of the Earl of Macclesfield. 

SdpPre isthac estate oportet, qui sunt cdplte candldo. Platjt. 
— " They who have grey heads are old enough to be wise." 

Scipias, vina liques, et spatio brevi 

Spent longam reseces. Holt. 

— " Be wise, rack off your wines, and abridge your hopes 
in proportion to the shortness of your life." 

Stipiens domir.dbitur astris. — " The wise man will govern the 
stars." 



408 SAP— SAT. 

Sapiens nihil facit invltus, nihil dolens, nihil coactus. Cic. 
— "A wise man does nothing against his will, nothing 
repiningly, or under compulsion." 

Sapiens quidem pol ipse fingit fortunam sibi. Plaut. — " The 
wise man surely carves out his own destiny." 

——Sapientem pascere larbam. Hon. — " To nourish a wise 
beard." To affect wisdom, by wearing the beard of a 
philosopher. 

Sapienter vitam instituh-e. Tee. — " "Wisely to regulate the 
conduct of one's life." 
Sapientia prima 

Stultitid caruisse. Hob. 

— " The first step towards wisdom is to be exempt from 
folly." 

Sapient issimum esse dicunt eum cui, quod opus sit, ipsi vPniat 
in mentem. Cic. — " He is reckoned the wisest to whom 
that which is required at once suggests itself." The 
definition of a wise man, as being one possessed of a store 
of wisdom, so well arranged in his memory that he can 
make it useful upon any emergency. 

Sapientissimus inter sapientes. Cic. — " The wisest of the 
wise." Said of the philosopher Thales. 

Sdpientum octdvus. Hoe. — " An eighth wise man." One 
added to the number of the Seven Wise Men of Greece. 
Applied ironically to a person who affects to be remark- 
ably wise, or, as we say, " a second Solomon." 

Sardonius risus. — " A Sardonic grin." A certain herb which 
grew in Sardinia by the extreme acridity of its taste was 
said to distort the features of those who ate of it. 

Sat cito, si sat bene. Prov. — " Quick enough, if well enough." 
Attributed by St. Jerome to Cato; but at present the 
words Si sat bene are alone to be found in his works. 

Sat cito, si sat tuto. — " Quick enough, if safe enough." 
This motto was a favourite maxim with the great Lord 
Eldon, who was struck with it in his school days, and 
made it his future rule of life. See Twiss's Life of Lord 
Eldon, vol. i. p. 49. 

Sat pulchra, si sat bona. JProv. — " Fair enough, if good 
enough." "Handsome is who handsome does." 

Satis eloquentia, sapientice parum. Saxl. — " Eloquence 
enough, but little wisdom." 



SAT— SCE. 409 

datis quod sujpcit — " What suffices is enough." " Enougri 
is as good as a feast." See Loves Labour's Lost, Act v. 
Sc. 1. 

Satis superque. — " Enough, and more than enough." An ex- 
pression used by Pliny, and not uncommon in other authors. 

Satis superque me benignttas tua 

Ditdoit. Hoe. 

— " Tour bounty has enriched me enough, and more than 
enough." Said by the poet of his patron Maecenas. 

Satius est iriitiis rnederi quam fini. — " It is better to cure at 
the beginning than at the end." See Principiis obsta, &c. 

Satius est prodesse etiam malis propter bonos, quam bonis deesse 
propter malos. — " It is better even to profit the bad for 
the sake of the good, than to injure the good for the bad." 
Hence the legal maxim, that it is better that ten guilty 
men should escape, than that one innocent man should 
suffer. 

Satius est recurrere, quam currere male. Prov. — " It is bet- 
ter to run back than to run the wrong way." When we 
are in a wrong course it is best to retrace our steps at 
once. 

Saucius ejurat pugnam gladiator, et idem 

Lmmemor antlqui vulnPris arma capit. Ovid. 

— " The wounded gladiator forswears all fighting, and yet 

forgetful of his former wound he takes up arms." 

Saxum volutum non obducitur musco. Prov. — " A rolling 
stone gathers no moss." 

Scabiem et contdgia lucri. Hoe. — " The contagious itch for 
gain." The passion with which a miser collects hrs heaps 
of gold. 

Scandalum magndtum. Law Lat. — " An offence against 
nobles." A reflection against a peer, or the body of peers. 
A statute to punish this offence has remained on our 
statute-book since the time of Eichard II. 

Scelere velandum est seelus. Sen. — " One crime has to be 
concealed by another." 

■ Seelus est juguldre Falernum, 

Et dare Campdno toxica sawa mero. Maet. 

— " It is a crime to kill Ealernian wine (by mixing), and 

to give (to your guests) deleterious poison in pure Cam' 

panian." 



410 scrc— sex. 

Scidus intra se taciturn qui cbgltat ullum 

Facti crimen habet. Juv. 

— " He who silently meditates the perpetration of a crime, 
incurs the guilt ot the deed." It is the intention that 
constitutes the crime. 

Scenu sine arte fuit. Ovid. — " The stage was devoid 

of art." 

Scientia pop'ince. Sen. — "The knowledge of cook-shop- 
keeping." The art of cookery. 

Scientice non visa ut thesauri abscondlti nulla est utllltas. — 
" Knowledge not seen, like hidden treasure, is utterly use- 
less." See De non apparentibus, &c, Paulum, &c, and 
Scire tuum, &c. 

Scilicet a spPculi sumuntur imagine fastus. Ovid. — " Pride, 
forsooth, is caught from the reflection in the mirror." 

Scilicet expectes, ut tradet mater honestos 

Atque alios mores, quam quos habet ? Juv. 

— " Can you expect, forsooth, that the mother will inculcate 
virtuous principles, or other than she possesses herself?" 

Scilicet ingPniis allqua est concordia junctis, 

Et servat stiidii foedPra quisque sui. Ovid. 

— " In truth there is a certain alliance between kindred 
minds, and each one cherishes the ties of his own pur- 
suit." This feeling makes good the proverb, " Birds of a 
feather," <fcc. 

Scilicet utfulvum spectPtur in ignlbus aurum, 

Tempore sic duro est inspicienda fides. Ovid. 

— " As the yellow gold is assayed in the fire, so is the faith 

(of friendship) to be tested in moments of adversity." 

Scindentur testes, gemmae f rang entur et aurum ; 

Carmlna quam tribuent, fama perennis erit. Ovid. 

— " Garments will rend, gems and gold will spoil ; the 

fame which poesy confers is everlasting." 

Scindltur incertum studia in contrdria vulgus. ViEG. — " The 
wavering multitude is divided into opposite opinions." 

Scio, coactus tud voluntdte es. Teh. — " I know, you are led 
by your own will." You plead necessity when you are 
governed solely by your own inclination. 

Scio quid valeant humeri et quid ferre recusent. — " I know 
what shoulders can bear, and what they will *"efuse to bear." 
Adapted from Horace, Ars Poet. 39, 40. 



SCI -SCR. 411 

Scire facias. Law Term. — " Tou are to let know." The 

name given to a judicial writ, usually issued to call on a 

person to show cause to the court why execution of a 

judgment passed should not issue. 
Scire potestdtes herbdrum usumque medendi. Vieg. — " To 

know the virtues of herbs, and their use in healing." 
Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. Pees. — 

" Your knowledge is nothing, unless others know that you 

possess it." See Quis eni<m, &c. 
Scire ubi allquid invenlre possis, ea demum maxima pars eru- 

ditionis est. — " To know where you can find a thing, is in 

fact the greatest part of learning." 
Scire volunt om/ies, mercedem solvere nemo. Jut. — " All 

would like to know, but few choose to pay the price." 

Most would like to possess knowledge, but few like tc 

incur the expense and trouble of learning. 
Scire volunt secreta domus, atque inde timeri. Jut. — " They 

wish to know the family secrets, and thence to be feared." 

Said in reference to persons at Home, who got introduced 

into families as slaves, and having gained possession of the 

family secrets, extorted money under threat of denunciation. 
Scis etenim justum gemma smpendtre lance 

Ancipitis librce. Pees. 

— " Por you know well how to weigh the justice of the 

case in the double scale of the poised balance." 
Scit genius, natdle comes qui temperet astrum. Hob. — " The 

genius, our companion from our birth, who regulates the 

planet of our nativity, knows best" — how to account for 

our various dispositions and propensities. 
Scit uti foro. — " He knows how to take advantage of the 

market." How to make his bargains, when to buy and 

when to sell. 
Scbpulis surdior Icdri 

Voces audit. Hoe. 

— " He receives his injunctions more deaf than the Icarian 

rocks." 
Scribendi recti, sdpere est et principium et Jons. Hob. — 

" Wisdom is the guiding principle and main source of all 

good writing." 
Scribentem jurat ipse favor, mtnuitque laborem ; 

Oumque suo crescens pectore fervet opus. Ovtd. 



412 SCR— SED. 

— " Enthusiasm itself aids the writer and diminishes his 

toil; and, as the work grows, it warms with his feelings." 
Scrlbtmus, et scriptos absfummus igne Melius; 

Exit us est studii parva favilla mei. Ovid. 

— " I write, and I hum my books when written : a few 

ashes are the result of all my labours." 
Scr'tblmus indocti doctlque. Jloit. — " Unlearned and 

learned, we all of us write." Descriptive of the Cuco'ethet 

scribendi. 
Scripta ferunt annos ; scriptis Agamemndna nosti, 

Et quisquis contra, vel simul arma tulit. Ovid. 

— " Writings survive the lapse of years; through writings 

you know of Agamemnon, and who bore arms against or 

who with him." 
Scriptdrum chorus omnia amat nemus etfugit urbes; 

Bite cliens Bacchi somno gaudentis et umbrd. Hor. 

— " The whole band of poets loves the groves and shuns 

cities ; genuine votaries of Bacchus, delighting in repose 

and the shade." 

Secreta hcec murmura vulgi. Jut. — " These sullen mur- 

murings of the populace." 
Secrete arriicos admfme, lauda palam. Syr. — " Advise your 

friends in private, praise them openly." 
Secundce cbgitatibnes meliores. — " Second thoughts are best." 
Secundas fortunas decent superbiee. Platjt. — " High airs 

befit prosperous fortunes." 
Secundo amne dejluit. — " He floats with the stream." 
Secundum artem. — " According to the rules of art." 
Secundum genera. — " According to classes." 
Secundum usum. — "According to usage," or "to the use 

of." 

Secnra quies, et ncscia fallere vita. Viro. — " Repose 

unfraught with care, a life that knows no guile." 
Sed de hoc tu videbis. Be me possum dlcere idem quod Blau- 

tlnuft pater in Trinummo, ' mihi quidem cetas acta ferine est* 

— " But as for that matter, it is your concern. For my 

owl. part, I may say with the father in the Trinummus of 

Plautus, 'my life is nearly at an end.'" The words of 

Cicero in his Second Epistle to BrutuB. 
Sed exsequdmur coeptum propositi ordlnem. Ph^d. — " But 

let us pursue our purpose in the order we proposed." 



Sm 413 

Sed fugit intPrea, fugit irreparable tempus. Vino. — " But 
meanwhile time flies, never to be regained." " Time and 
tide wait for no man." 

Sed justifies primum munus est, ut ne cui quis noceat nisi 
lacessrtus injuria. Cic. — " But it is the first rule of jus- 
tice, that you offend no one, unless provoked thereto by 
an act of injustice." Unless you are acting in defence 
of your legal rights. 

Sed nil dulcius est, bene quam munlta tenere 
Edita doctrlnd sapientum iempla serend ; 
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque vidPre 
Errdre, atque viam palanteis qucerPre vitce. Luce. 
— " But nothing is there more delightful than to occupy 
the elevated temples of the wise, well fortified by tranquil 
learning; whence you may be able to look down upon 
others, and see them straying in every direction, and wan- 
dering in search of the path of life." 

Sed nisi peccassem, quid tu concPdPre posses ? 

MdtPriam vPniee sors tibi nostra dedit. Ovid. 

— " Had I not sinned, what had there been for thee to 

pardon ? My fate has given thee the opportunity for 

mercy." 

Sed non ego credulus illis. Virg. — " But I do not be- 
lieve them." I do not give credit to all their flattery. 

Sed notat Tiunc omnis domus et viclnia tcta, 

Introrsum turpem, speciosum pelle decora. Hor. 
— " But all his family and the entire neighbourhood look 
upon him as inwardly base, though of a specious, showy 
exterior." Description of a hypocrite. 

Sed plures riimid congesta pecunia curd 

Strang ulat. Juv. 

— " But money heaped up with overwhelming care tor- 
ments many." 

Sed praesta te eum, qui mihi, a tPneris (ut Graci dhuni) un- 
giiiculis, es cognttus. Cic. — " But prove yourself to be the 
same person that I have known you to be, ' from your 
tenderest finger-nails,' as the Greeks say." See A tenerit 
unguiculis. 

Sed quce praclara et prospera tanti, 
Ut rebus Icetis par sit mensura malorum ? Ju V. 
— " But what brilliant or prosperous fortune is of auffi- 



414 SED-SEM. 

cient wonh that your measure of evils should equal your 
success ? " 

Sed satis est ordre Jbvem, qu<e donat et aufert ; 

Det vitam, det opes, cequum mi anhnum ipse pardbo. Hob. 
— " But it is sufficient to pray to Jove for those things 
which he gives and takes away at pleasure ; let him grant 
life, let him grant wealth; I myself will provide a wall- 
regulated mind." 

——Sed summa sequar fasti gia rerum. ViKO. — " But I will 
trace the principal heads of events." I will relate the 
most prominent parts of the subject. 

Sed tdciti fecere tamen convicia vultus. Ovid. — " But still 
her silent features censured me." 

Sed te decor iste, quod optas 
Esse vetat, votoque tuo tua forma repugnat. Ovid. 
— " But that very beauty forbids thee to be what thou 
wishest, and the charms of thy person are an impediment 
to thy desires." 

Sed tu 

IngPnio verbis conclpe plura meis. Ovid. 
— " But do you conceive in imagination more than is ex- 
pressed in my words." 

Segnem ac desidem, et Circo et thedtris corruptum mllitem. 
Tacit. — " A soldiery slothful and indolent, debauched by 
the Circus and the theatres." Enervated by the dissipa- 
tions of the metropolis. 

Segnihs homines bona quam mala sentiunt. — " Men have a 
slower perception of benefits than of injuries." 

Segniiis irritant animos demissa per aurem, 

Quam quce sunt oculis subjecta fidi'libus. Hob. 
— " Facts of which we have information merely through 
the ear, make less impression upon the mind than those 
which have been presented to the more trustworthy eye." 

Semel abbas semper abbas. — " Once an abbot, always an ab- 
bot." A mediaeval expression. 

Semel in anno licet insanire. — " We may play the fool once a 
year." 

Semel insanwtmus omnes. Mant. — " We have all been mad 
at some time." Few men do net feel, that at some mo- 
ments of their lives they have been uninfluenced by reason. 
See Id commune, &c. 



SEM— SEN. 415 

Semel malus, semper prxsilrrfitur esse malus. Law Max. — " A 
man once bad is always to be presumed bad." The pre- 
sumptions will be against a man of known bad character. 

— ' SPmtta certe 

Tranquilly per virtutem patet unica vita. Jut. 

— " The only sure path to a tranquil life is through 

virtue." 

Semper avdrus eget ; certum voto pete Jinem. Hor. — "The 
avaricious man is ever in want ; prescribe a fixed limit to 
your desires." 

-- Semper bonus homo tiro est. Mart. — " A beginner is 
always a good man." To the same effect as our proverb, 
" A new broom sweeps clean." 

Semper causae eventbrum magis movent, quam ipsa eventa. — 
" The causes which produce great events are always re- 
garded with more interest than the events themselves." 

Semper habet Utes alternaque jurgia lectus, 

In quo nupta jacet ; minimum dormJtur in illo. Jut. 
— " The bed in which a "wife lies has always its disputes 
and wranglings ; there is little chance of sleep there." A 
rather too sweeping censure, in reference to what are 
called Curtain lectures. 

Semper honos, nomenque tuum, laudesque manPbunt. VlRG. 
— " Thy honour, thy renown, and thy praises shall be 
everlasting." 

Semper idem. — "Always the same" — applied to the mas- 
culine gender. Semper eadem, to the feminine. 

Semper inops, quicunque cupit. Claud. — " He is always 

poor who is for ever wishing for more." See Semper ava- 
rus, &c. 

■■ ■ Semper nocuit differre paratis. Lucak. — " It has ever 
been prejudicial for. those who are prepared to admit of 
delay." 

Semper pardtus. — " Always ready." 

Semper tibi pendeat hamus ; 

Quo minime credos gurglte, piscis erit. Ovid. 

— " Let your hook be always ready ; in waters where you 

least think it there will be a fish." 

Senectus non impedit quominus literarum studio tencdmu* 
usque ad ulttmum tempos senectdtis. Cic. — " Old age doee 



410 SEN— SEP. 

not hinder us from continuing our studies, even to the 
latest period of our existence.'' 

Senem juventus pigra mendicum creat. Prov. — " Youth passed 
in idleness produces au old ago of beggary." 

Senilis stultitia, quae delirdtio appelldri solet, senum levium 
est, non omnium. Cic.-—" That foolishness, which in old 
men is termed dotage, is not common to all who are old- 
but to those who are of a frivolous disposition." 

Senibres pribres. — "The older ones first." "Little boys 
last," as they say at school. 

Senibfibus gravis est inveternti moris mutdtio. Quintub 
Cuet. — " A change of confirmed habits is severely felt by 
aged persons." 

Sensim labefacta cadtbat 

Beliqio. CLAUDIA*. 

— " By degrees religion was undermined and fell." 

——Sensitpoenamquepeti, vrniamque timeri ; 
Vive, licet nolis, et nostro munere, dixit, 

Cerne diem. Lucan. 

— " He perceived that punishment was courted, and par- 
don dreaded. ! Live on,' said he, • although thou art 
unwilling, and, by my bounty, behold the light of 
day/" 

Sententia prima 

Hujus erit : post hanc osteite atque arte minbres 
Censebunt : tanquam fames discrlmen agdtur, 
Aut Untunes : tanta est qucerendi cura deebris. Juv. 
— " Her opinion will be asked first. Then those who are 
her inferiors in years and skill will give their votes, as 
though their mistress's good name or life were at stake. 
So great is the anxiety for gaining beauty." A consulta- 
tion of lady's-maids upon their mistress's toilet. 

Hentio te sedem homtnum ac domum contempldri ; quce si tibi 
parva (tit est) if a videtur, hese ccelestia semper spectdto ; ilia 
hnmdna contemriito. Cic. — " I perceive that you contem- 
plate the seat and the habitation of man ; now, if it ap- 
pears as little to you as it really is, you should fix your 
eyes steadily upon heavenly objects, and despise those oi 
this world." 

Septem convivittm, novem convicium. — " Seven 's a bacq-iief^ 



SEP— SEE. 417 

nine's a brawl." A favourite dinner maxim of the 

ancients. 
Septtem horas dormisse sat est juvmique, senique. — " Seven 

hours of sleep is enough for old or young." A mediaeval 

aphorism probably. 
Septennis quum sit, nondum i'dldit denies. Prov. — " Though 

he is seven years of age, he has not yet cut his teeth." 

Said ironically of men who devote themselves to frivolous 

or childish pursuits. 
Sepulchri 

Jifitte supervacuos Jwndres. Hor. 

— "Dispense with the superfluous honours of the tomb." 

Abstain from all vain parade and show. 
Sequentem fugit, ffigientem sequitur. — "It flies from him who 

pursues it, it pursues him who flies." Said of glory. See 

Quod sequitur, &c. 
Sequestrdri facias. Law Lat. — " Cause to be sequestrated." 

An order for sequestration. 
Sequitur superbos ultor a tergo Deus. Sen. — " An avenging 

God follows close at the back of the proud." 
Sequitur ver hyemem. Prov. — " Spring follows winter." Bad 

fortune will not last for ever. 
Sequiturque patrem non passibus cequis. Virg. — " And 

he follows his father, not with equal steps." These words 

may be applied to a son who fails to equal the talent dis- 
played by his father. 
Sera in fundo parsimonia. Sen. — " Economy is too late at 

the bottom of the purse." " Too late when all is spent." 
Sera nunquam est ad bonos mores via. Sen. — " The way to 

good manners is never too late." 
Seria cum possim, quod delectantia tnalim 

Scrlbere, tu causa es, lector. Mart. 

— " That I prefer to write of lighter subjects, when I am 

able to treat of serious ones, th6u, reader, art the cause." 

Address of an author whose only object is to consult the 

taste of his readers. 
Seriatim. — " In order." According to rank or priority. 
Series implexa causdrum. Sen. — " The complicated chain of 

causes." Fate. 
Serit arbores quae in altera sceculaprosint. An adaptation from 

Statius. — " He plants trees for the benefit of a future 

age." 

1 B 



418 SEA. 

Serius aut ciiiits sedem prfiperdmus ad unam. Ovid.— 

"Sooner or later we all hasten to one place." All are 
born to die. 

Sermo datur cunctis, ammi sapientia paucis. — " Language is 
given to all, wisdom to few." 

Sermone huic obsonas. Plaut. — " By your talking you 
drown his voice." 

Sero clypPum post vulnih-a sumo. Ovid. — " Wounded, 

too late I take my shield." 

Sero recusat ferre quod siibiit jugum. Sen. — " Too late he 
refuses to bear the yoke to which he has submitted." 

Serb resptcltur tellus, ubifune soluto, 

Currit in immensum panda carina solum. Ovid. 
— " Too late we look back upon the land when the moor- 
ings are loosed, and the curved keel runs out into the 
boundless deep." 

Sero sripiunt Phryges. Prov. — " The Trojans become wise 
too late." When their city was on the point of being 
taken, they began to think of restoring Helen. 

Sero vPnienfibus ossa. — " The bones for those who come 
late." The share left for those who come late to din- 
ner. 

Serpens ni edat serpentem, draco non fiet. Prov. — " A ser- 
pent, unless he devours a serpent, will not become a 
dragon." This adage implies that kings only become 
great by the destruction of neighbouring potentates. 

Serpens, sitis, ardor, arena 

Dulcia virtuti. Ltjcan. 

— " Serpents, thirst, heat, sands, are all sweet to heroic val- 
our." The speech of Cato to his troops when about to 
cross the deserts of Libya. 

Serum est cavendi tempus in mPdiis malts. Sen. — " It is too 
late to be on our guard when we are in the midst of mis- 
fortunes." 

Serus in caelum redeas, diuque 

Laetus intersis popiilo. Hob. 

— " May it be long before you return to heaven, and may 
you long live happily among your people ! " A flattering 
compliment addressed to Augustus ; and since paid to 
other potentates. 

Servdre cives, major est virtus patr'uB patri. Sen. — " To piv* 



SEK— SEX. 419 

serve his fellow-citizens is the greatest of virtues in the 
father of his country." 

Servdre leges patrias pulchrum ac bonum. — " To observe the 
laws of our country is honourable and good." 

Servdtd semper lege et ratione loquendi. Jut. — " Always 
observing the rules and principles of grammar." 

Servetur ad imum 

Qualis ab incepto processrrit, et sibi constet. Hor. 

— " Let [the character] be maintained to the very last, just 

as it begins, and so be consistent with itself." 

Servientes servitute ego servos introduxi mihi, 

Non qui mihi impPrdrent. Plaut. 

— "I have brought servants into my house to serve, not 
to command, me." 

Serviet ceternum, quia parvo nesciet uti. Hon. — " He will 
be always a slave, because he knows not how to enjoy a 
little." A slave to his own boundless and ungratified 
desires. 

Seu ciilldus sanguis sen rerum inscitia vexat. Hoe. — " Whe- 
ther it is the heat of your blood, or your ignorance of the 
world, that influences you." 

Seu quis Olympidcce mirdtus prcemia palmce 

Pascit equos, seu quis fortes ad ardtra juvencos ; 

Corpora prcecipue matrum legat. ViRG. 

— " Whether any one, aspiring to the praises of the Olym- 
pic palm, breeds horses, or sturdy bullocks for the plough, 
let him choose, with especial care, the dams for their 
shape." The qualities 01 the sire are most regarded at 
the present day. 

Seu recredre volet tenudtum corpus ; ublve 
Accedent anni, et tractdri mollius cetas 

Imbecilla volet. Hob. 

— " Or if he shall desire to refresh his emaciated body ; or 
if, when years approach, his feeble old age shall require to 
be treated more tenderly." Words quoted by Lord Mon- 
boddo, shortly before his death. 

Sex horas somno, tottdem des h'gtbus cequis ; 
Qudtuor ordbis, des epulisque duas. 
Quod superest ultra, sacris larglre Camoenis. Coke. 
— " Give six hours to sleep, as many to the study of just 
III 



420 SEX— SI. 

laws. Pray four hours, and give two to refreshment. -All 
that remains, bestow upon the sacred Mm 

Sexu fcemlna, inghiio vir. — "In sex a woman, in genius u 
man." Epitaph of Maria Theresa of Aust ria. 

Si ad honestdiem nati sumus, ea aut sola expetenda est, aui 
certe omni pondere gravior est habenda quam reliqua omnia. 
Cic. — " If we are born for the practice of virtue, it ought 
either to be our only object, or at least deemed of far 
more weighty importance than anything else." 

Si ad naturam vivas, nunquam eris pauper ; si ad opiniunem, 
nunquam dives. Sen. — " If you live according to what 
nature requires, you will never be poor ; if according to 
the notions of men, you never will be rich." 

Si ad paupertdtem admiyrant infdmiee, 
Gravior paupertas Jit, fides sublestior. Plaut. 
— " If disgrace is added to poverty, poverty will be more 
unendurable, character more frail." 

Si antiquitdtem spectes, est vetustisslma ; si dignitatem, est 
honoratissima ; si jurisdictionem, est capacisstma. Coke. — 
" If you consider its antiquity, it is most ancient ; if its 
dignity, it is most honourable ; if its jurisdiction, it is 
most extensive." A description by Coke of the English 
House of Commons. 

Si licut' eotnmi mini, causa sunt quinque bibendi ; 
SotpHit udecntus, pra sens sitis, atque futura, 
Aut vini bonltas, aut qucelibet altera causa. 
— " If I remember right, there are five excuses for drink- 
ing : the visit of a friend, thirst existing, thirst to come, 
the goodness of the wine, or any other excuse you please." 
These lines have been translated by Dean Aldrich, a good 
scholar and musician, and a lover of his pipe and good- 
fellowship. Attributed by Menage (i. 172) to Pere Sir- 
mond. 

Si cadPre necesse est, oncurrendum discr'imtni. Tacit. — " If 
we must fall, let us boldly face the danger." Misfortune 
ought to be met with energy. 

Si caput dolet omnia membra languent. Aphorism. — " If the 
xiead aches, all the members of the body are languid." 
in the body politic, incompetence in the ruler entails 
disorder among those below him. 

Si claudo cohabUes, sulclaudicdre disces. — " If you lire with 



81. 421 

hiin who is lame, you will learn to limp." The result oi 
evil associations. A mediaeval proverb. 

Si cui vis apte nilbere, nube pari. Ovid. — " If you wish tu 
marry suitably, marry your equal." The poet alludes to 
equality of years ; he might, with equal justice, have al- 
luded to equality of condition. 

Si cum hdc exceptibne detur sapientia, ut illam inclusam 
tmeam, nee enunciem, rejiciam. Sen. — " If wisdom were 
offered me on condition that I should keep it bottled up, 
I would not accept it." See Quis enim, &c, and Scire 
tuum, &c. 

Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos ? — " If God is with us, who 
shall be against us ? " 

Si dicentis erunt fortiinis absona dicta, 

Romani tollent equites peditesque cachinnum. Hob. 
— " If the words of the speaker are at variance with his 
fortunes, both Roman knights and plebeians will laugh at 
your expense." 

Si dixeris, JEstuo, sudat. Juv. — " If you say ' I am 

warm,' he sweats." Applied to one of those truckling 
hangers-on who are always of the same opinion with their 
patrons. See Orceculus esuriens, &c. 

Si dum vivas 

Tibi bene facias, jam, pol, id quidem esse Tiaud perlonginquum, 
Neque si hoc hodie amlseris, post in morte id eventurum esse 

unquam. Plaut. 

— " If while you live you enjoy yourself, why, .really, that 
is for no very long time : so too, if you lose the present 
day, it can never return to you after you are dead." 

Si est animus eequus tibi, satis habes, qui bene vitam colas. 
Plaut. — " If you have a well-regulated mind, you are 
possessed of abundance, in leading a good life." 

Si ex re sit populi Romani, feri. — " If it be for the good of 
the Roman people, strike the blow." The dying words of 
the Emperor Galba, as given by Tacitus and Suetonius, 
and quoted by Lord Bacon. 

Si foret in terris, rideret Democritus. Hor. — " If De- 

mocritus were on earth, he would laugh." Democritus 
laughed at the follies of mankind : hence he was called, 
"The laughing philosopher." 



422 81. 

Si foret in terris, ridiret Heraclltus. — " If Heraclitus were 
on earth, even he would laugh." Thia philosopher waa 
continually weeping for the follies of mankind. A pro- 
verb, adapted from the preceding line. 

Si fortuna juvat, cavHo tolli ; 

Si fortuna tonat, cavtto mergi. Auson. 
— " If fortune favours you, be not elated ; if fortune thun- 
ders, do not sink." In all circumstances preserve equan- 
imity. 

Sifractus illdbdtur orbis, 

Impavtdum f Orient rulnce. Hor. 

— " If the world's wreck should fall about him, the ruins 
would crush him unconcerned." Said of the man consci- 
ous of his integrity. 

Si fuit errandum, causa* habet error honestas. Ovid. — " If 
I was to err, my error has a fair excuse." 

Si genus hum dn tun, et mortdlia temrittis arma ; 

At sperdte Deos mUmfires fundi atque nefandi. ViEG. 

— " If you despise the human race and mortal arms, still 

expect that the gods will be mindful of right and wrong." 

Si in hoc erro quod ariimos hominum immortdles esse credam, 
lilenter erro ; nee mihi hunc errorem quo detector dum vivo 
extorqueri volo. Cic. — " If in this I err, that I believe the 
souls of men to be immortal, I err willingly ; nor do I 
wish this error, in which I take a delight, to be wrested 
from me whilst I live." 

Si incolce bene sunt mordti, pulchre munitum arbttror. Plaut. 
— " If the inhabitants of a city have good morals, I con- 
sider it well fortified." 

Si judtcas, cognosce ; si regnas, jube. Sen. — " If you are a 
judge, investigate ; if you are a ruler, command." The 
difference between judicial and ministerial duties. In the 
one you must be governed by evidence ; in the other, by 
your own perception of right and wrong. 

Si juxta claudum habttes, subclaudicdre disces. Prov. — " If 
you live near a lame man, you will learn to limp." See 
Claudicantis, &c, and Si claudo, &c. 

Si laus homtnem alticere ad recte faciendum non potest, ne 
metus quidem a fcedissimis factis potest avocdre. Cic. — 
u If the love of praise cannot induce a man to act honestly, 



81. 423 

the fear of punishment can never restrain him from the 
basest of actions." 

Si leoriina pellis non satis est, assuenda vulp'ina. Prov. — " If 
the lion's skin will not do, we must sew on that of the 
fox." "What cannot be effected by force may be com- 
passed by craft. 

Si me menddcii captas, non potes me crtpere. — " If you are try* 
ing to catch me in a lie, you cannot catch me." 

Si meliores sunt quos ducit amor, plures sunt quos corrigit 
timor. Coke. — " If those are the best whom love induces, 
they are the most whom fear holds in check." 

Si mihi permit quas vult dicer e, ea quae non vult audiet. Ter. 
— " If he persists in saying whatever he likes against me, 
he shall hear what he will not like himself." 

Si (Mimnermus uti censet), sine amore jocisque 
Nil est jucundum, vivas in amore jocisque. Hob. 
— " If (as Mimnermus thinks) there is no pleasure without 
love and mirth, live amid love and mirth. 

Si monumentum requiris, circumsplce. — " If you seek my mo- 
nument, look around." Epitaph of Sir Christopher wrer, 
the architect who designed St. Paul's Cathedral in Lon- 
don, the greatest memorial of his fame. 

Si mutdbtle pectus 
Est tibi, constliis, non curribus, utfre nostris. Ovid. 
— " If you have a mind capable of change, use my advice 
and not my chariot." The advice of Apollo to Phaethon. 

Si natura negat, facit indigndtio versum. Juv. — " Though 
Nature denied the power, indignation would give birth to 
verses." 

Si nihil infesti durus vidisset Ulysses ; 

Penelope felix, sed sine laude,foret. OviD. 
— " If the hardy Ulysses had seen no adversity, Penelope 
would have been happy, but unknown to fame." Virtue 
is only proved by misfortune. 

Si non err asset, fecerat ille minus. Mart. — " If he had not 
committed an error, he would have done less." Said of a 

Eerson who, having been negligent in his duty, exerts all 
is energy to retrieve his character. 
Si non esse domi, quos des, causdbere nummos ; 

Lltera poscetur. OviD. 



424 SI. 

% 
— "If you Bay that vou have no money at home to pay 
with, a hill will be asked for." 

Si non 

Intendes arumum studiis el rebus honestis, 

Jnvidid vel amore vigil torqurMre. Hob. 

— " If you do not apply your mind to study and laudable 
pursuits, you will be tormented and kept awake by envy 
or by love." 

Si non pertaesum ihiilami, tadceque fuisset ; 

ITuic uniforsan pfilui succumbere culpa. VlEG. 
— " Had I not been tired of the marriage-bed and nuptial 
endearments, to this one frailty I might perhaps give way " 
— Of marrying in her widowhood. 

Si numeres anno soles et niiblla toto, 

Invenies riifidum scepius esse diem. Ovid. 
— " If you count the fine days and the cloudy ones 
throughout the year, you will find that the bright days 
are the most in number." 

Si parva licet compunPre magnis. Vieg. — " If I may be 

allowed to compare small things with great." 

Si poi'ma loquens pictura est, pictura taciturn potma debet esse. 
Ad Hehenn. — " If a poem is a speaking picture, a pic- 
ture ought to be a silent poem." See Mutum est, &c. 

Si possis sudvtter, si non quocunque modo. — " Gently if you 
can, if not, by any means." 

Siprccsens bene collocdveris, defutiiro tibi dubiurn non erit. — 
" If you make a good use of the present time, you need 
not be apprehensive as to the future." 

Si qua fidem tanto est ijperi latura vetustas. ViEO. — " If 
posterity will give any credit to so great an exploit." 

Si qua, metu dempto, casta est, ea denique casta est. Ovid. — 
" If any woman preserves her chastity when fear of de- 
tection is removed, she, indeed, is chaste." Ovid had only 
experience of the more worthless part of the sex, and be- 
lieved, with Pope, that every " woman is at heart a rake." 

Si quid amicum erga bene feci, aut consului Jideliter, 
Non videor meruisse laudem ; culpa caruisse arbitror. 

Plaut. 
— " If I have in any way acted well towards my friend, or 
have faithfully consulted his advantage ; I deem myself 



SI. 426 

not deserving of praise ; I consider only that I am free 
from blame." 

Si quid frce.ris honest um cum labore, labor abit, honestum ma- 
net. Si quid fectris turpe cum voluptdte, voluptas abit, 
turpitudo manet. — " If you have done anything honourable 
by dint of labour, the labour is past, the honour survives. 
If you have done anything base for pleasure's sake, the 
pleasure is past, the baseness survives." 

Si quid ingPnui sanguinis habes, non pluris eum fades quam 
lutum. Petron. Arbiter. — " If you have any free-born 
blood in you, you will esteem him no more than you 
would a lump of clay." 

Si quid novisti rectius istis 
Candidus imperii ; si non, his utere mecum. Hor. 
— " If you know anything better than these maxims, can- 
didly impart it ; if not, with me adopt these." 

Si quis. — "If any one." A notification by a candidate for 
orders, inquiring if any impediment is alleged against him, 
is so called. 

Si quis cUricus, aut monachus, verba joculatoria risum moven- 
tia serat, anathemdta esto. — " If any clerk or monk shall 
use a jocular expression exciting laughter, let him be ex- 
communicated." An ordinance of the 2nd Council of 
Carthage. 

Si quis dat mannos, ne qucere in dentibus annos. — " Tou must 
not look a gift horse in the mouth." A mediaeval Leonine 
proverb. 

Si quis Deus mihi largidtur ut hdc (state repuerascam et in 
cunis vdgiam, valde recusem. Cic. — " If any god were to 
grant that at this age I should become a child again and 
cry in the cradle, I should decidedly refuse." 

Si quis mutuum cui dederit,fit pro proprio perditum. Plato. 
— " If one lends money to another, it is lost so far as being 
one's own." 

Si, quoties homines peccant, suafulnxina mittat 

Jupiter, exiguo tempore inermis erit. Ovid. 

— " If, as oft as mortals sin, Jove were to hurl his light- 
nings, in a little time he would be without weapons." 

Si res ita sit, vdleat latitia ! — " If this ia the fact, then fare- 
well happiness ! " 



426 SI. 

Si Roma furris, "Romano vlvtto more; 

SifuPris alibi, v'wlto sicut ibi. St. Ambrose. 

— " If you are at Rome, live after the Roman fashion ; if 

you are in any other place, live as they do there." 

Si sapias, sapias ; habeas quod Di dabunt boni. Plaut.— 
" It' you are wise, be wise. Take the good the gods pro- 
vide you." 

■ . Si sapis, 

Neque praterquam qua* ipse amor molestias 

Habet, addas, et Was, quas habet, recte feras. Ter. 

— " If you are wise, you will not add to the troubles which 

love brings, but will bear with patience those which belong 

to it." 

Si sitis, nihil interest utrum aqua sit an vinum : nee refert 
utrum sit aureum pbculum an vitreum. Sen. — " If you are 
thirsty, it matters not whether it be water or wine ; nor 
does it signify whether the cup be of gold or of glass." 

Si sol splendescat Marld purificante, 

Major erit glacies post festum quamfuit ante. 
— " If the sun shines on the Purification of St. Mary, the 
frost will be greater after the feast than it was before." 
A mediaeval proverb ; similar to 

" If Candlemas day be fair and bright, 
"Winter will have another flight." 

Si sfimulos pugnis c&dis, mariibus plus dolet. Plaut. 

— " If you thump a goad with your fists, your hands 
suffer the most." An evil is aggravated by foolish op- 
position. 

Si tamen, e nobis atiquid, nisi nomen et umbra, 

Restat, in Elysid valle Tibullus erit. Ovid. 

— " If however aught of us but the name and shade re- 
mains, Tibullus will exist in the Elysian vales." 

Si te fece'rit securibrem. Law Term. — " If he gives you se- 
curity." If he holds you harmless. 

Si te nulla movet iantdrum gloria rerum. VlRO. — " If you 
are unmoved by the glory of exploits so mighty." 

- Si te proverbia tangunt, 

Mense malas Maio nubere vulgus ait. Ovid. 

— " If proverbs have any weight with you, the common 

people say that ' bad prove the wives that are married in 



SI. 427 

May.' " Because the Lemuria, or rites of the dead, were 
celebrated in that month. 

8i tempus in studia conferas, omne vita? fastldium ejfughis ; 
nee noctem feri optdbis tcedio lucis, nee tibi gravis eris, nee 
aliis supervdeuus. Sen. — "If you devote your time to 
study, you will avoid all the irksomeness of life ; you will 
neither long for the night, being tired of the day ; nor will 
you be a burden to yourself, or make your society insup- 
portable to others." 

Si tibi deficiant medlci, medlci tibifiant 

Hcbc tria ; mens hildris, requies, moderdta diaeta. 

Maxim of the School of Health at Salerno. 
— " If you stand in need of physicians, let these three 
things be your physicians ; a cheerful mind, relaxation 
from business, and a moderate diet." 

Si turpia sunt qua facis, quid refert neminem scire, cum tu 
scias? O te miserum, si contemnis hunc testem. Sen. — 
" If what you do is criminal, what matters it that no 
one else knows, when you know it yourself P O miser- 
able man, if you despise this testimony." The condemn- 
ing power of a bad conscience. 

Si vales, bene est ; ego quidem valeo. — " If you are well, 'tis 
good ; as for me, I am well." 

Si vir es, i. Ovid. — " If you are a man, go." 

Si vis incolumem, si vis te reddere sanum, 
Ouras tolle graves, irasci crede profdnum. 
— " If you wish to be safe in person and in health, sht^i 
weighty cares, and deem it profane to be angry." Me- 
diaeval lines. 

Si vis me fere, dolendum est 

JPrimum ipsi tibi. Hob. 

— " If you wish me to sympathize, you must first show 
grief yourself." Advice given to the actor or writer of 
tragedy. 

Si vis pacem, para bellum. — " If you wish for peace, be pre- 
pared for war." An armed peace is the best security 
against war. 

Si vos valetis, bene est, ego quidem valeo. — " If you are well, 
'tis good; I myself am well." Sometimes abbreviated 
thus, Si Vos V. B. E. E. Q. V. 

Si vulnus tibi, monstrdtd rddice vel herbd, 



428 SIB- -SIC. 

Nonjieret lrviM,fugrrts rddlce vel herhS 

Projiciente nihil curdrier. Hor. 

— " If you had a wound which was not relieved by tho 
application of a plant or root prescribed for it, you would 
reject the plant or root that had not effected a cure." 

Sibi quisque peccat. Prov. — " Every one who sins sina 
against himself." Our sins fall on our own heads, what- 
ever may be our object in sinning. 

Sibi quivit 
Speret idem: sudet multum, frustrdque laboret 

Ausus idem. Hob. 

— " Anybody might hope to do the same thing, but would 
sweat much and labour in vain, in attempting it." The 
result of a vain attempt to imitate a great author. 

Sibi uni fortunam debet. — " He owes his fortune to himself 
alone." 

Sic agitur censfira, et sic exempla parantur ; 

Cum vindex, alios quod monet, ipse facit. Ovtd. 
— " Thus is a censorship discharged, and thus is an exam- 
ple given ; when the assertor of morality himself practises 
that which he enjoins on others." 

Sic ait, et dicto citius tiimida oequora placat. ViRG. — " He 
so says, and quicker than speech he lulls the swelling 
seas. 

Sic cinimum tempusque traho ; meque ipse reduco 

A contempldtu, summoveoque, mali. Ovid. 

— " Thus do I occupy my mind and my hours ; and thus 
do I take myself away and withdraw myself from the 
contemplation of my woes." 

Sic edgitandum est tanquam allquis in pectus infimum in- 
splcere possit. Sett. — " You ought so to regulate your 
thoughts, as if any one could look into the inmost recesses 
of your breast." 

Sic cum infrriore vivas, quemadmudwm tecum superiorem velis 
vlvVre. Sen. — " So live with your inferior, as you would 
wish a superior to live with you." 

— Sic cum man us impia s&vit, 

Sanguine Ceesareo Somanum extinguere nomen ; 
Attdnttnm tant& siibtto terrore ru~m& 
Hiimnnum genus est, totusque perhorruit orbis. OviD. 
— " Thus, when an impious band of traitors madly raged 



SIC. 429 

to extinguish the Roman name in the blood of Caesar, the 
human race was astounded with sudden terror at ruin so 
'universal, and the whole earth shook with horror." In 
allusion to the prodigies which were said to have happened 
at the time of the murder of Julius Caesar. 

Sic delatores, genus homlnum publico exitio repertum, et poems 
nunquam satis coercltum, per prcemia eliciebantur. Tacit. 
— " Thus were informers, a description of men introduced 
for the public destruction, and never sufficiently restrained 
by penalties, invited to action by rewards." The his- 
torian is speaking of the informers, who swarmed and 
flourished in imperial Rome. 

Sic ego nee sine te nee tecum vlvere possum ; 

Et vldeor voti nescius esse mei. Ovid. 

— " Thus I can neither live without you nor yet with you ; 

and I seem not to know my own wishes." 

i Sic itur ad astra. Virg. — " Thus do we reach the 

stars." By the path of virtue. 

Sic noctem patPrd, sic duram carmine, donee 

Injlciat radios in mea vina dies. Propert. 

— " Thus will I pass the night with the goblet and the 

song, until the day shall shed its rays upon my wine." 

Sic omnia fatis 

In pejus rui're et retro sublapsa referri. Virg. 
— " Thus, by the Fates' decree, all things change quickly 
for the worse and retrograde." A destiny fixed and im- 
mutable was held by the ancients to rule all things. 

Sic passim. — " So in various places." 

Sic pr&senPtbus utdris voluptdttbus utfuturis non noceas. Sen. 
— " So enjoy present pleasures as not to alloy those which 
are to come." Beware of being cloyed by satiety. 

Sic quibus intumuit suffusd venter ab undd ; 

Quo plus sunt potce, plus sitiuntur aquae. Ovid. 

— " So, with those troubled with dropsy, the more water 

they drink, the more they thirst." 

— — Sic quisque pavendo 

Dat vires famce, nulloque auctore malorum 

Qua? jinxere timet. Lfca.it. 

— " Thus each person by his fears gives strength to ru- 
mour ; and without any real ground for apprehending evil 
fears what he has conjured up." 



430 SIC. 

Sic transit gloria mundi — " Thus passes away the glory of 
tins world." Beginning of a Sequence of the Romish 
Church, and said to have been formerly used at the in- 
auguration of the popes of Rome. 

Sic iitrre tuo ut alieno ne Uedas. Coke. — " So use your own, 
as not to injure the property of another." So use your 
own property, as not to cause a nuisance or injury to 
others. 

Sic visum VenPrt; cui placet imputes 
Formas, atque firitmos sub jug a ahi-nea 
Scevo mittere cumjoco. Hoe. 

— " Such is the will of Venus ; who delights, in cruel 
sport, to subject to her brazen yoke persons and tempers 
ill suited to each other." 

Sic vita erat ; facile omnes perferre ac pati / 
Cum quibus erat cunque una, his sese dedere ; 
JSorum obsPqui studiis ; adversus nemini, 

Nunquam pr&ponens se aliis. Tee. 

— " Such was his life ; readily to bear and comply with all ; 
with whomsoever he was in company, to them to resign 
himself; to devote himself to their pursuits ; at variance 
with no one, and never preferring himself to others." 

Sic vice cum hommlbus tanquam Deus videat, et videt. Sen. 
— " So live with men, as if God might see, and does see 
you." 

Sic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratibne voluntas. Jut. — " So I 
will it, so I command it, let my pleasure stand for my 
reason." In the original, the line begins, Hoc volo, &c. 

Sic vos non vobis. See Hos ego, &c. 

Sicut ante. — "As before." 

Sicut meus est mos, 

Nescio quid mPditans nugdrum, totus in illis. Hoe. 

— " Meditating on some trifle or other, as is my habit, 

and totally intent upon it." 

Sicut Notus pulvZrem, sic luxuries improbos gyrat. — " As the 
south wind carries along the dust, so does sensuality the 
wicked." A mediaeval passage. 

Sicut 
Farvula (nam exemplo est) magni formica laboris 
Ore trahit quodcunque potest, atque addit acervo 
Quern struit ; kaud igndra, ac non incauta futuri. Hob. 



SIC— SIN. 431 

— " Thus the little ant (for she is an example) with vast 
toil carries in her mouth all she can, and adds to the hean 
which she piles up, by no means ignorant or regardless of 
the future." 

Sictitl aurum ignis, it a eflam ami cos tempus judtcat. — "As nr© 
tries gold, so does time try friends." 

Silent leges inter arma. Cic. — See Inter arma, &c. 

Silvis, ubi passim 

Palantes error certo de trdmlte pellit, 

Ille sinistrorsum, hie dextrorsum, abit. Hor. 

— "As in the woods, where a mistake leads people to 
wander from the proper path ; one deviates to the right, 
another to the left." 

Simla, quam simills, turplssima bestia, nobis ! — " The ape, that 
most vile beast, how like it is to ourselves ! " 

Simla simla est, etlamsi aurea gestet insignia. Prov. — " An 
ape is an ape still, though it wear jewels of gold." 

— Simile gaudet slmill. Prov. — " Like loves like." See 
Pares cum, &c. 

Similes allorum respl.ee casus, 
Mltlus ista feres. Ovid. — See Quotles flenti, &c. 

Similes habent labia lactucas. Prov. — " Like lips like lettuce." 
Every class has its own tastes and predilections. Said by 
Crassus, on seeing an ass eat thistles ; the only occasion 
on which he was known to laugh. 

Similia slmllibus curantur. — " Like things are cured by like." 
The basis of Homoeopathy. 

Simplex mundltlls. Hoe. — " Simple in neat attire." " Neat 
but not gaudy." 

Slmul ac duraverit &tas 

Membra arimumque tuum, nobis sine cortlce. Hor. 

— "As soon as age shall have strengthened your limbs 
and your mind, you will swim without cork." 

Slmul etjucunda et idonea dicere vita. Hor. — " To tell 
at the same time what is pleasant and what is suited to 
life." To blend amusement with instruction. 

Simuldtlo amoris pejor odlo est. Pliny the Younger. — " Pre- 
tended love is worse than hatred." 

Sincf'rwm est nisi vas, quodcunque infundis acesclt. Hor. — 
" Unless the vessel is clean, whatever you pour into it 



*32 SIN. 

turns sour." If the youthful mind is not proper] v pro- 
pared, the lessons of instruction will be turned to bad pur- 
pose. "We see daily instances in the perverted use made 
of the arts of reading and writing. 

Sine G : rrre et Baccho friget Venus. — " Without Ceres and 
Bacchus, Venus will starve." Without the support of 
wine and food, love would soon perish. 

Sine curd. — " Without care." A sinecure is a place or ap- 
pointment of which the only duty is that of receiving the 
salary. 

Sine die. — "Without a day." An assembly is adjourned 
tine die when no time is named for its reassembling for the 
consideration of the business for which it originally met. 

Sinefuco etfalldcid homo. ClO. — " A man without guile and 
deceit." 

Sine invidid. — "Without envy." Not invidiously. 

Sine me, vacuum temput ne quod dem mini 

Laboris. Teh. 

— " Allow me to grant myself no leisure, no respite from 
labour." 

Sine me vocdri pessimum, ut dives vocer. Prov. — " Call me 
all that 's bad, so you call me rich." The maxim of one 
who makes money his chief object. 

Sine mill t is usu 

Mollia secures peragebant otia mentet. Ovid. 
— " Without occasion for soldiers, the minds of men, free 
from care, enjoyed an easy tranquillity." The happy state 
of man in the Golden Age. 

Sine odio.—" Without hatred." 

Sine pectore corpus. — "A body without a heart." 

Sine pennis voldre haud facile est. Plaut. — " It is not easy 
to fly without wings." Said of those who attempt to do 
what is beyond their natural capacity. 

Sine probd causa. — " Without approved cause." 

Sine prole. — " Without offspring." Sometimes abbreviated, 
8. P. 

Sine qua non. — " Without which, not." Anything indis- 
pensable, and without which another cannot exist. 

Sine querela raurtalitdtis jura penddmus. Se:s. — " Let ua 
abide by the laws of mortality without complaining." 



SIX— SIT. 433 

Sine virtiite argutum civem mihi hdbeam pro praficd, 

Qua? alios collaudat, eapse se vero non potest. Plaut. 

— " Without valour an eloquent citizen is like a hired 
mourner, who praises other people for that which he can- 
not do himself." The prcejicce, or hired mourners, were 
females. 

Sine virtule esse amicitia nullo pacto potest ; quce autem inter 
bonos amicitia dlcltur, hcec inter malos factio est. Sall. — 
" There can be no true friendship without virtue ; for that 
bond which, among good men, is called friendship, among 
wicked men becomes faction." 

Singula de nobis anni pr&dantur euntes. Hor. — " Each pass- 
ing year deprives us of something." 

Singula quceque locum teneant sorttta decenter. Hor. — " Let 
each keep the place assigned it by its respective proper- 
ties." The character of Tragedy is not to be blended with 
that of Comedy. 

Singula quid referam ? nil non mortdle tenemus, 

Pectoris exceptis ingeniique bonis. Ovid. 

— " "Why should I enter into details ? we have nothing 
that is not perishable, except the blessings of the heart 
and of the intellect." 

Sint Mcecendtes, non derunt, Flacce, Marones ; 

Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt. Mart. 

— " Let there be Maecenases, Flaccus, and Maros will not 
be wanting ; and even your own fields will give you a Vir- 
gil." In allusion to the patronage given by Maecenas to 
Virgil. 

Sint sales sine vilitdte. — " Let your jests be without vul- 
garity." 

Sit bona librorum et provisos frugis in annum 

Olpia. Hor. 

— " Let me have a good supply of books, and a store of 
provisions for the year." The great necessaries with 
Horace for the true enjoyment of life. 

Sit brevis aut nullus tibi somnus merididnus. Maxim of the 
School of Salerno. — " At midday take either a short nap or 
none at all." 

Sit mihi fas audita loqui ; sit numme vestro 

PandPre res altd terra et cal'iglne mersas. VlRG. 

— " Be it permitted me to utter what I have heard ; may 

2 F 



Mi SIT— SOC. 

I 

of 



I by your divine will disclose things buried in the depthi 
tlu- earth and in darkness." 



Sit mihi mensa tripes et 

Concha salis puri, et toga, qua defendrre frigus, 

Quamvis crassa queat. Hob. 

— " Let me have but a three-legged table, a shell full of 

pure salt, and a garment, which, though coarse, may keep 

off the cold." 
Sit mihi quod nunc est, Hiam minus ; ut mihi vivam 

Quod siiperest <evi, si quod superesse volunt IX. Hob. 

— " May my fortune De as it is now, or even less ; so I 

enjoy myself for the remainder of my days, if the gods 

will that any do remain." 
Sit modus lasto maris, et vidrum, 

Militiaque. Hob. 

— " Let there be an end to my fatigues by sea, by land, 

and in warfare." 
Sit piger ad pcenas princeps, ad prcsmia velox. Ovid. — " A 

prince should be slow to inflict punishment, prompt to 

reward." 
Sit procul omne nefas ; ut ameris, amdbllis esto. Ovid. — 

" Afar be all criminal designs ; that you may be loved, be 

worthy to be loved." 
Sit tibi crediVdis sermo, consuetaque verba. Ovid. — " Let 

your language be intelligible, and your words such as are 

commonly used." 
Sit tibi terra levis. — " May the earth lie light upon thee." 

Often found in Roman Epitaphs, as also in the abbreviated 

form, S. T. T. L. These words are wittily parodied in the 

well-known Epitaph on Sir John Vanbrugh, the architect : 
" Lie heavy on him, earth, for he 
Laid many a heavy load on thee." 
Sit tua cura sequi, me duce tutus eris. Ovid. — " Be it your 

care to follow, with me your guide you will be safe." 
Sit venia verbis. — " May pardon be granted to my words." 
Sive pium vis hoc, sive hoc muliibre vocari ; 

Confiteor niise.ro molle cor esse mihi. Ovid. 

— " Whether you call it affectionate, or whether woman- 
ish. I confess that the heart of poor me is but tender." 
Societdtis vinculum est ratio et ordtio. Cic. — " -Reason and 

speech are the bond of human society." 



SOC— SOL. 435 

Socius atque comes, turn honoris, turn etiam calamitdtit. ClC. 
— " The companion and sharer as well of my honours a8 
of my misfortunes." 

Socius fdelis anchora tuta est. — " A faithful companion is a 
sure anchor." 

Socrates, cui nulla pars sdpientice obscftra fait, non erubuit 
tunc, cum interposUd arundme cruribus suis, cum parviilis 
fliolis ludens, ab Alcibiade risus est. Valee. Max. — 
" Socrates, to whom no branch of wisdom was unknown, 
was not ashamed, when, being f ound astride a stick, 
playing with some little children, lie was laughed at by 
Alcibiades." 

Socrates quidem cum rogdretur cujdtem se ipse dlcVret, mun- 
ddnum inquit ; totius enim mundi se incrlam et civem arbi- 
trabdtur. Cic. — " Socrates, when asked of what country 
he called himself, answered, of the world ; for he considered 
himself an inhabitant and citizen of the whole world." 

Sol crescentes decedens dupllcat umbras. Vibg. — " The 
setting sun doubles the lengthening shadows." 

Sol occubuit ; noon nulla secuta est. — " The sun has set ; no 
night has ensued." A piece of flattery addressed to a son, 
and equally complimentary to his father. Burton applies 
it to Charles I., as the successor of James. Camden says 
it is ascribed to GKraldus, and refers to the succession of 
Kichard on the death of Henry II. See M\ra cano, Ac. 

Sohlmen mlseris socios habuisse doloris. — " It is some comfort 
to the wretched to have partners in their woes." 

I SoUbdrnus consumere longa loquendo 

Tempora, sermdnem deficiente die. Ovid. 

— " We were in the habit of spending much of our time in 

conversation ; and the day sufficed not for our discourse." 

Solem e mundo tollunt qui amicttiam e vita tollunt. — " They de- 
prive the world of the sun who deprive life of friendship." 
Solem quis dlcere falsum 

Audeat ? VlBO. 

— " "Who dares call the sun a deceiver ? " Virgil says this 
when about to mention the prognostics afforded by the 
sun for fair or foul weather. 

Solent menddces luere pcenas maPfici. Pn^D. — " Liars 
generally pay the penalty of their guilt." 

Solet a despectis par referri gratia. Pn m>. — " Eepayment 
in kind is generally made by those who are despised." 
2 f 2 



430 SOL— SOM. 

Soli lumen mutudri ; coelo Stellas ; ranee aguam. Frov. — 
" To lend light to the sun, stars to the heavens, and water 
to the frogs." 

Solitudlnemfaciunt, pacem appellant. Tacit. — "They main 
a desert and call it peace." The conduct pursued by some 
civilized nations in exterminating what they call barbarians. 

Sollicitant alii remis freta caca, rnuntque 

In ferritin : penetrant aulas, et I'imXna regum. Vieo. 

— " Some harass unknown seas with oars ; some rush 

into arms ; some work their way into courts and the 

Ealaces of kings." Virgil contrasts the quiet of a country 
fe with the conditions of the sailor, the soldier, and the 
courtier. See O fortunati nimium, &c. 

Solo cedit, quicquid solo plantdtur. Law Max. — "Whatever 
is planted in the soil goes with the soil." 

Solum patriae omnibus est carum, dulce, atque jucundum. Cic. 
— " His native soil is sweet, dear, and delightful to every 
one." 

Solve senescentem mature sanus equum, ne 

Peccet ad extremum ridendus. Hob. 

— " Wisely in time dismiss the aged courser, lest, an ob- 
ject of derision, he stumble at last." 

Solvit ad diem. Law Term. — "He paid to the day." A 
plea to an action of debt. 

Solvate tantis ariimum monstris, 

Solvate, Superi. Sen. 

— " Save, ye gods of heaven, from such chimaeras, save the 
mind ! " 

Solvit que animis mirdcula rerum, 

Erlpuitque Jbvi fulmen, vlresque tonanti. Manil. 
— " He both freed our minds from dread of things above, 
and snatched the lightnings from Jove, and from the 
thunderer his might." See Eripuit coelo, &c. 

Solvuntur tabula?. — " The bills are dismissed." 

Samne quies rerum, placidisstme, somne, Deorum, 
Pax ariimi, quern curafugit, qui cor da diurnis 
Fessa ministeriis mulces, repiirasque labbri. Ovid. 
— " Sleep, thou repose of all things ; sleep, thou gentlest 
of the deities ; thou peace of the mind, from whom care 
flies ; who dost soothe the hearts of men wearied with the 
toils of the day, and dost recruit them for labour." 



SOM— SOS. 437 

Bomniame terrent veros imitantia casus ; 

Ht vigilant sensus in mea damna mei. Ovid. 

— " Visions alarm me, that portray my real misfortunes ; 

and my senses are ever awake to my sorrows." 

Somnia, terrures mdgtcos, mlrdcula, sagas, 

JYbcturnos LPmures, portentdque Thessdla, rides ? Hob. 
— " Can you laugh at dreams, magic terrors, wonders, 
witches, goblins of the night, and Thessalian prodigies ? " 

Somnus agrestium 

Lenis virorum non humiles domos 

Fustldit, umbrosamque ripam. Hor. 

— " Light slumbers do not disdain the humble dwelling of 

the peasant, or the shady bank." 

Sorex suo perit indlcio. Prov. — " The mouse perishes, by be- 
ing his own informer." His hole being seen is the cause 
of his destruction. 

Sors et virtus miscentur in unum. Virg. — " Chance 

and valour are blended together." It is equally doubtful 
which may prevail. 

Sortes Virgilidnai. — " The Yirgilian Chances." A species of 
divination practised by the ancients, by opening the works 
of Virgil, and remarking the lines beneath the fingers the 
instant the leaves were opened. Spartianus tells us that it 
was much practised by the Emperor Adrian. When the 
works of Homer were used, it was called, " Sortes Home- 
ricce" The ancient Christians used a similar kind of 
divination with the Holy Scriptures, or the Psalter, which 
was called " Sortes Sanctorum" and was repeatedly con- 
demned by the councils of the Church. King Charles the 
First is said to have tried the " Sortes Virgiliancs" in the 
Bodleian Library at Oxford, when on a visit there in com- 
pany with Lord Falkland, and to have opened at the pro- 
phetic lines in the 4th Book of the JEneid, 1. 615, begin- 
ning, 

At hello auddcis popvli vexdtus et armis. 
" Harassed in warfare by the arms of a valiant people — " 
This is Dr. Wellwood's account, but Aubrey relates the 
same story of the poet Cowley and Charles, Prince of 
Wales, at Paris, in 1648. 

Sospes eas, semper que parens ; mihifilia rapta est. 

lieu! mi'dior quanto tors tua sorte meal Ovid. 



438 SPA-8PE 

— " Unharmed mayest thou be, and a parent mayest tliou 

ever remain. From me my daughter nas been removed. 

Alas! how much happier is thy lot than mine! " 
Spargrre voces 

In vulgum amblguas. VlRO. 

— "To scatter doubtful rumours among the mob." 
Spatio brevi 

Spent Ion gam rUsPces. Ihint luquimur, fugerit invida 

JEtas. Carpe diem, quam mlriime cridula postero. Hob. 

— " Abridge your hopes in proportion to the shortness of 

your life. While we are conversing, envious time has 

been flying. Seize the present day, trusting as little as 

possible in the morrow." 
Spectas et tu spectdberis. — "You see and you shall be seen." 

You here see the characters of others, and if necessary 

you shall see your own held up to view. 
Spectdtum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsa. Ovid. — " They 

come to see, they come too to be seen." Said by Ovid 

with reference to the motives with which the Roman fe- 
males flocked to the Circus and the Theatres. 
Spectdtum admissi, visum tenedtis, amid ? Hoe. — " Being 

admitted to see [the picture], can you, my friends, refrain 

from laughter? " 
Spent bonam certamque domum reporto. — " I bring home a 

good and assured hope." I announce hopes not likely to 

be disappointed. 
Spem pre'tio non emo. Teb. — " I do not buy hopes with 

money." I do not give gold for mere expectations. 
Sperat infestis, metuit secundis 

Alterant sortem bene prcepardtum 

Pectus. Hob. 

— " The heart that is well prepared, hopes in adversity, 

and fears a change of fortune in prosperity." 
Sperdte, et vosmet rebus servdte secundis. VlBG. — "Hop( 

on, and reserve yourself for prosperous times." 
Sperdte mtseri, cavete felices. — " Live in hope, you who are 

wretched ; you who are in prosperity, beware." 
Sperdvtmus ista 

Dum fortuna fuit. VlBG. 

— " We once had such hopes, while fortune favoured us." 
Speremuj quae voliimus, sed qua acciderit ferdmus. ClC— 



8PE— 8PL. 439 

w Let us liope for what we will ; but let us endure what 

befalls us." 
Sperne voluptdtes, nocet empta dolore voluptas. Hob. — " De- 
spise pleasures ; pleasure purchased by pain is injurious." 
Spes bona dat vires, dnwium quoque spes bona Jirmat ; 

Vivere spe vidi qui moriturus erat. 

— " Good hope gives strength, good hope also confirms 

the resolution ; even him who was on the point of death, I 

have seen kept alive by hope." 
Spes est vigilantis somnium. Coke. — " Hope is the dream 

of a man awake." An adaptation from Quintilian. 
Spesfacit, ut videat cum terras undlque nullas, 

Naufragus in mediis brdchia jactet aquis. Ovid. 

— " Hope it is that makes the shipwrecked mariner strike 

out in the midst of the waves, even when he beholds no 

land on any side." 
Spes gregis. Vibg. — " The hope of the flock." Sometimes 

applied to one particular child, the hope of the family. 

" The flower of the flock. '* It is also used ironically. 
Spes incerta futuri. Vibg. — "Hopes of the future full 

of uncertainty." 
Spes sibi quisque. Vibg. — " Let every man's hope be in 

himself." Let every man trust to his own resources. 
Spes tenet in tempus, semel est si credtta, longum ; 

Ilia quidem fallax, sed tamen apta Dea est. Ovid. 

— " Hope, if once indulged, endures for a long time ; 

although a deceitful goddess, she is nevertheless a con- 
venient one." 

Spirat adkuc amor, 

Vivuntque commissi calores 

JEolice ftdtbus puellee. Hoe. 

— " Still breathes his love, and still lives the glowing 

warmth, imparted to the lyre by the ^Eolian fair." Said 

in allusion to Anacreon and Sappho. 

Spirat tragicum satis, et fellciter audet. Hob. — " He 

breathes a spirit tragic enough, and is happy in his at- 
tempt." 
Splendide mendacc. Hob. — " Nobly false." Untrue for a 

noble object. Sometimes used ironically in reference to 

an egregious liar. See Piafraus. 



440 SPO— ST A. 

Sponde, nox* prcesto est. Prov. — "Be surety, and barm ia 
at hand." From the Greek. 

Spretaque injuria forma. Viro. — " And the affront 

offered to her slighted beauty." In allusion to the resent- 
ment of Juno at the judgment of Paris. 

Sta, viator, heroem calcas. — M Pause, traveller ; thou treadest 
on a hero's dust ! " The epitaph inscribed by the great 
Conde over the remains of his antagonist, the brave 
Merci. 

Stabat Mater dolorosa. — "There stood the Mother, bathed in 
tears." The beginning of the Prose, or Sequence, of the 
Mass for the Dead in the Roman Church. 

Sfandum est contra res ad versus. — " We must stand up 
against adversity." 

Stans pede in uno. Hob. — " Standing on one leg." Applied 
to a work, this phrase means that it bears no marks of 
extraordinary exertion. 

Stare decisis, et non moviire quieta. Law Map. — " To abide 
by decisions made, and not to stir up points set at 
rest." 

Stare putes, adeo procedunt tempdra tarde. Ovid. — " The 
time proceeds so slowly, you would think that it was 
standing still." 

Stare super vias antlquas. — " To stand upon old ways." To 
be attached to old habits or customs, and to resist novel- 
ties or innovations. 

Stat fortuna domus, &c. Vieg. — See Genus immortale, &c. 

Stat magni nominis umbra. Lucan. — " He stands, the 

shadow of a mighty name." The poet says this in refer- 
ence to the titles gained by Pompey in his younger days ; 
but it is sometimes quoted as though meaning that the 
lustre of a person's former greatness is impaired by his late 
conduct, and he is no more than the faint image of what 
he was. See Magni nominis, &c. 

Stat nominis umbra. — An adaptation of the above, used 
by ' Junius ' as the motto of his pseudonymous Let- 
ters. 

Stat pro ratione voluntas. — " My pleasure stands as my rea- 
son." See Hoc volo, &c., and Sic volo, &c. 

Stat sua cuique dies ; breve et irrepardbtle tempos 



STA— STR. 441 

Omnibus est vitce ; sed fatnam extender e factie, 

Hoc virtutis opus. VlRG. 

— " For every one his day is fixed ; a short and unalterable 

term of life is given to all ; but by deeds to extend our 

fame, this is virtue's task." 

Slatim daret, ne differ endo videretur negdre. Corn. Nep. — 
" He would give at once, lest, by deferring, he should seem 
to deny." Said of Themistocles. See Bis dat, &c. 

Status quo, Status in quo, Statu quo, or In statu quo. — " The 
state in which, [it was]." 

Status quo ante helium. — " The state in which the belligerent 
nations stood before war commenced." A term used in 
diplomatic communications. The opposite term is the 
Uti possidetis, which see. 

Stemmdta quid faciunt ? Quid prodest, Pontice, longo 

Sanguine censiri ? Juv. 

— " What do pedigrees avail ? Of what use, Ponticus, is 
it to be descended from a long line of ancestors ? " 

Stercus et ur'ina medicorum ferula prima. — "To regulate the 
natural evacuations is the first rule of physicians." 

Sterilisque diu palus, aptaque remis 

Vlcinas urbes alit, et grave sentit ardtrum. Hon. 
— "And the swamp, long sterile, and plied by the oar, 
now maintains the neighbouring cities, and feels the 
heavy plough." 

Sternitur, exanlmisque tremens procumbit Jiumi bos. VlRG. 
— " The ox is felled, and, quivering, lies expiring on the 
ground." Porson is said to have exclaimed, on letting 
Bos's Ellipses fall upon some volumes of Hume's History 
of England, " Procumbit Humi Bos ! " 

Stet processus. Law Lat. — " Let process be stayed." 

Stillicidi casus lapidem cavat. Lucr. — " The fall- 
ing drop hollows out the stone." 
-Sttmiilos dedit cemula virtus. Lucan. — " Valorous rivalry 



spurred him on." 
Stolldam prcebet tibi vellPre barbam. Pers. — " He holds 

out his silly beard for thee to pluck." 
Stomachdtur omnia. Cic. — " He frets about evory thing." 

He takes everything to heart. 
Strata jaccnt passim sua qucsque sub arbore poma. VlRG.— 



442 STE— STU. 

"The fruits lie scattered here and there beneath their 
trees." 

Stratum super stratum. — " Layer upon layer," or " stratum 
upon stratum," as geologists would say. 

Stnnua nos exercet inertia ; ndvlbus at que 

Quadrlgis pPttmus bene vlvPre. Hob. 

— " A useless activity urges us on ; by ships and by 
chariots we seek to live happily." 

StudPre suis commodis. Cic. — "To study one's own con- 
venience." 

Siudiis florentem igndbllis oti. Vtbo. — " Indulging in 
the pursuits of inglorious ease." Said by the poet of him- 
self, when writing the Georgics. 

Studio cuhnae tenPtur. Cic. — " He is possessed by thoughts 
of the kitchen." "His heart is in the kitchen." He 
thinks of nothing but eating. See Animus est in, &c. 

Studio minuente labbrem. Oyid. — " His zeal diminish- 
ing his toil." 

Studium famce mihi crescit amdre. Ovid. — " My zeal 

increases with my eagerness for fame." 

• Stulta est dementia, cum tot ublque 

Vnttbus occurras, peritiira? parcere charted. Jut. 
— " It were misplaced forbearance, when you meet so 
many poets everywhere, to spare paper that is sure to be 
wasted." The words of an indignant critic. 

Stulte, quid ofrustra votis puer'iUbus optas, 

Qua non ulla tulit,fertque feretque dies? Ovid. 
— " O fool ! why, with thy childish aspirations, dost thou 
vainly wish for that, which no time, past, present, or to 
come, will realize ? " 

——Stultttia est, cui bene esse licet, eum preevorti 

Lltlbus. Platjt. 

— " It is sheer folly for a man who can enjoy himself, to 
turn to brawling in preference." 

Stultttia est ei te esse tristem, cujus potestas plus potest. 
Plaut. — " It is sheer folly to be morose towards him 
whose rule is the stronger." 

'——Stultttia est, fdcinus magnum fimido cordi credere, nam 
omnes 
Ees perinde sunt ut agas. Plact. 



STTJ. 448 

— " It is sheer folly to intrust a bold design to a timorous 

heart, for all things are just as you make them." 
Stultltia est vendtum ducPre invltos canes. Plaut. — " It is 

folly to take out unwilling dogs to hunt." 
Stultitiam dissimuldre non potes nisi tacilurnitdte. — " There 

is no way to conceal folly but by silence." 
Stultitiam patiuntur opes. Hon. — " Riches license 

folly." Follies are often passed over in the rich. 
Stultitiam simuldre loco, sdpientia summa est. — " To affect 

folly is, on some occasions, consummate wisdom." The 

foolishness, for instance, affected by Brutus in the house 

of Tarquinius. 
Stultbrum calami carbbnes, mania chartce. Prov. — " Coals 

are the fool's pen, the walls his paper." So the English 

proverb, " A white wall is a fool's paper." 
Stultbrum incurdta malus pudor ulcPra celat. Hor. — " It is 

the false shame of fools that makes them conceal their 

uncured wounds." This maxim may be applied both to 

wounds of the mind and of the body. 
Stultum consilium non modo effectu caret 

Sed ad perniciem quoque mortdles avocat. Ph-ED. 

— " An ill-judged project is not only profitless, but lures 

mortals to their destruction as well." 
Stultum est dicere, Non putarem. — " It is foolish to say, * I 

could not have thought it.' " See Nil admirari, &c. 
Stultum est in luctu capillum sibi evellere, quasi calvitio moeror 

levetur. Cio. — " It is folly to tear one's hair in sorrow, 

just as though grief could be assuaged by baldness." 
Stultum est timere quod vitdri non potest. Syr. — "It is 

foolish to fear that which cannot be avoided." 
Stultus es, qui facta infecta fdcere verbis postiilas. Plaut. — 

" You are a fool to expect by words to make undone what 

has been done." 
Stultus es, rem actum agis. Plaut. — " You are a simpleton, 

you are doing what has been done already." 
Stultus labor est ineptidrum. Mart. — " The labour is fool- 
ishly thrown away that is bestowed on trifles." 
Stultus nisi quod ipse facit, nil rectum pulat. — " The fool 

thinks nothing well done but what ne does himself." 

Self-sufficiency is a sign of a weak mind. 
Stultus, qui, patre occiso, I'iberos relinquat. Prov. — " He u 



41 1 STU— SUA. 

a fool who kills the father and leaves the children." 

Things must never be done by halves. 
Stultus semper incipit v'tvPre. Prov. — " The fool is always 

beginning to live." He is always putting off settled 

habits and amendment till to-morrow. 
Stylus virum arguit. — " The style proclaims the man." 
Sua compardre commoda ex incommodis altcrius. Ter. — " To 

build up his own fortunes on the misfortunes of another.'* 
Sua confessione hunc jugiilo. Cic. — " I convict him by his 

own confession." His own testimony coudemns him. See 

Suo sibi, &c. 

Sua cuique deus Jit dira cup/do. Vibo. — " Each one's 

ruling appetite is his god." 
Sua cuique quum sit liriimi cogit&tio, 

Colorque proprius. Ph.£D. 

— " Since each man has a turn of thinking of his own, and 

a tone peculiar to himself." See Quot homines, &c, and 

Trahit sua, &c. 
Sua cuique vita obscura est. — "Every man's life is in dark- 
ness to himself." No man is a competent judge of his 

own conduct. 
Sua cuique voluptas. — " Every man has his own pleasure." 

" Every man to his liking." See Trahit sua, &c. 
Sua miinPra mitt it cum hamo. Prov. — " He sends his pre- 
sents with a hook attached." He is angling for a return 

with interest. " He throws a sprat to catch a herring." 
Sua quisque exempla debet aequo ammo pati. Phjed. — " Every 

one is bound to bear patiently the consequences of his 

own example." 
Sua regina regi placet, Juno Jbvi. Plattt. — " The king is 

S leased with his queen, Jupiter with his Juno." " Ever} 1 
ack has his Jill." See Asinus asino, &c, Pares cum, &c> 

and Simile gaudet, &c. 
Suam quisque homo rem memtnit. — " Every man is mindful 

of his own interests." 
•——Suave est ex maqno tollere acervo. Hor. — " It is a 

pleasant thing to take from a great heap." Said satirically 

of a misei who takes from an immense heap the little that 

he will venture to use. 
Suave, mari magno, turbanfibus aquora ventis, 

14 terra magnum alterius spectdre laborem. LrcRSl'. 



SUA— SUB. 445 

— " It is a pleasant thing from the shore to behold the 
dangers of another upon the mighty ocean, when the winds 
are lashing the main." As Rochefoucauld says, "In the 
adversity of our best friends we often find something 
which does not displease us." 

Suavltas sermonum atque morum haudqudquam mediocre con- 
dimentum amicitice. Cic. — " Mildness of address and man- 
ner is by no means an unimportant seasoning to friend- 
ship." ^ 

Suavlter in modo, fortlter in re. — " Gentle in manner, reso- 
lute in deed." Motto of Earl Newborough. 

Sub fine or finem. — " Towards the end." 

Sub hoc signo vinces. See In hoc, &c. 

Sub initio. — " Towards the beginning." 

Sub Jove frigido. Hon. — " Under the cold sky." 

Sub Jove pars durat, pauci tentoria ponunt. Ovid. — " Some 
endure the open air, a few pitch tents." 

Sub marmore etiam atque auro servltus habitat. Sen. — " Even 
under marble and golden roofs dwells slavery." Slavery 
to the dominion of vice, sorrow, and discontent. 

Sub omni laplde scorpius dormit. JProv. — "Beneath every 
stone a scorpion lies asleep." A warning to act in all 
things with caution and deliberation. 

Sub poena. Law Lat. — " Under a penalty." The title of a 
writ issued for summoning witnesses. 

Sub rosd. — " Under the rose." See Est rosa, &c. 

Sub silentio. — " In silence." The matter passed sub silentio — 
i. e. without any notice being taken of it, without being 
canvassed at all. 

Sublta amicitia rarb sine poenitentid colltur. — " Sudden friend- 
ships are rarely contracted without repentance." 

Sublto crevit, fungi instar, in divitias maxlmas. — " He has 
suddenly started up, like a mushroom, into immense 
wealth." 

Subldtd causa tollitur effectus. Law Max. — " The cause re- 
moved, the effect is removed." The cause removed, the 
effect must cease. See Cessante causa, &c. 

Sublatam ex ocidis quxrlmus invldi. Hob. — See Virtutem 
incolumem, &c. 

SublJmi f Priam s'idera vertlce. Hor. — " I shall tower to the 
stars with exalted head." Seriously said by H^Tace in a 



446 SUB— SUM. 

spirit of poetic rapture : but often quoted merely iu bur* 
lesque. 

Substantia prior et dignior est accidente. Law Max. — "The 
substance is prior to and of more weight than the acci- 
dent." A judgment, for instance, solemnly pronounced, 
shall not be arrested for a defect in point of form. 

Succeddnewn. — " A substitute." 

Successus ad perniciem multos devficat. Phj2D. — " Success 
leads many astray to their ruin." 

Successus improborum plures aWcit. P11.ED. — " The success 
of the wicked is a temptation to many." 

Succnsior est virgo qua serpyllum quam quee moschum olet. — 
" The damsel is more tempting who smells of wild thyme 
than she who is scented with musk." A mediaeval proverb. 

Succurrendum parti maxime laboranti. Celsus. — " We 
should assist the part which has the most to endure." 

Sudor Angttcus. — " The English sweat." The sweating sick- 
ness was so called. 

SiiJjTicit huic tumilus, cui non suffecerit orbis. — " This tomb 
now suffices for him, lor whom the world did not suffice." 
The import of an epitaph for the tomb of Alexander the 
Great. 

Suggestio falsi. — " The suggestion of a falsehood." 

Sui amans, sine rivdli. — " A lover of himself, without a rival.'' 
Cicero says this of Pompey. 

Sui cuique mores Jingunt fort fmam. Corn. Nepos. — " Every 
man's fortune is shaped by his own manners." So the 
English proverb, " Manners make the man." 

Sui generis. — " Of its own kind." Of its own genus or class, 
as distinguished from any other. 

Sui juris. Law Term. — " Of his own right." Not depend- 
ent on the will or control of another. 

Sum quod eris, fui quod es. — " I am what you will be, I was 
what you are." A lesson to the living on the tombs of 
the dead. 

Sume cdldmum, tempera, et scribe veloclter. — " Take your pen, 
observe my words, and write quickly." The words of the 
Venerable Bede, addressed on his death -bed to his sr 
cretary. 

— — Sume superbiam 

Qucss'itam mentis. Rob. 



SUM— SUN. 447 

— " Assume the pride won by your deserts." 

Sftmtte in exemplum pPciides ratibne carentes. Ovid. — " Take 
as an example the beasts devoid of reason." 

S/'cmtte matPriam vestris, qui scribUis, eequam 
Viribus, et versdte diu, quidferre recusent, 

Quid valeant humeri. Hon. 

— " Te who write, make choice of a subject suited to your 
abilities, and weigh in your mind what your powers are 
unable, and what they are able, to perform." 

Summa perfectio attingi non potest. Cic. — " Consummate 
perfection cannot be attained." 

Summa petit livor. Oyid. — " Envy strikes high." Envy 

takes a lofty flight. 

Summa sedes non capit duos. Prov. — " The highest seat will 
not admit of two." See Nulla fides, &c. 

Summam nee metuas diem, nee optes. Maet. — " Neither fear 
nor wish for your last day." 

Summis naribus olfacere. Prov. — " To smell with the tip of 
the nose." To pass an opinion on a matter after a slight 
examination only. 

Summum bonum. — " The chief good." The great object for 
which it is worth our while to live. Some philosophers 
among the ancients held pleasure to be the Summum 
bonum, others virtue. 

Summum crede nefas ammam prceferre pudori, 

Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas. Juv. 

— " Consider it to be the greatest of infamy to prefer life 

to honour, and, for the sake of living, to lose the object of 

living." 

Summum jus scepe summa injuria est. Cic. — " Extreme jus- 
tice is often extreme injustice." Applied to the enforce- 
ment of legal penalties to the very letter, without having 
regard to equity or the circumstances of the case. This 
was a favourite maxim with the Emperor Justinian. See 
Jus summum, &c. 

Sumptus censum ne snperet. Plaut. — " Do not let your ex- 
penses outrun your income." " Cut your coat accord ng 
to your cloth." See Messe tenus, &c. 

Sunt bona mixta malis, sunt mala mixta bonis. — " Good ia 
mixed with evil, and evil with good." 



448 SUN. 

Sunt bona, sunt quadam medidcria, sunt mala phira 

Qua* legis. Makt. 

— " Of those which you will read, some are good, some 
middling, and more are bad." The character given by 
Martial of his Epigrams. 
Sunt certi d^nf que fines, 
Quos ultra citrdque nequit consistere rectum. Hob. 
— See Est modus, &c. 

Sunt delicto tamen, quibus ignovisse vellmus. Hon. — "There 
are some faults, however, which we are ready to par- 
don." 

Sunt ibi, si vivunt, nostrd quoque conslta quondam, 

Sed non et nostrd poma legenda manu. Ovid. 

— "There, too, it they are still alive, are apples, once 
planted with my hand, but not destined to be gathered by 
it." Said by Ovid, when in banishment, of his gardens in 
the vicinity of Rome. 

Sunt Jovis omnia plena. Viuo. — " All things are full 

of Jove." See Dei plena, &c. 

Sunt lacryma rerum, et mentem tnortdlia tangunt. Virg. — 
" Tears are due to wretchedness, and mortal woes touch 
the heart." 

Sunt plerumque regum voluntdtes vehementes, et inter se con- 
trdrice. Tacit. — " The desires of monarchs are generally 
impetuous and inconsistent." 

Sunt quadam vitia, quce nemo est quin libenter fugiat. ClC. 
— " There are certain vices which every man would most 
gladly avoid." 

——Sunt qucedam viticrum elementa. Juv. — "There are 
certain first elements of vice." See Nemo repente, &c. 

Sunt sliperis sua jura. Ovld. — " The gods of heaven 

have their own laws." Often quoted to show that even 
the highest powers are subject to certain laws. 

Sunt tamen inter se communia sacra pottis ; 

Diversum quamvis quisque sequumur iter. Ovid. 
— "Yet with poets there are certain common ties ; al- 
though we each pursue our respective path." 

Sunt verba et voces, quibus hunc lenlre dolorem 

Possis, et magnam morbi deponere partem. II oh. 

— " There are words and maxims by which you may miti. 



SUO— HTTP. 44S 

gate your parn, and in a great measure overcome the 
disease." See Fervet avaritid, &c. 

Suo jutnento malum accersere. Prov. — "To fetch mischief 
upon one's own beast." To bring misfortunes upon one's 
self. 

Suo Marte. — " By his own prowess." He performed it sue 
Marte, — by his own skill and ability. 

Suo sibi gladio hunc jiignlo. Teb. — " With his own sword 
do I stab this man." I defeat him with his own weapons ; 
by his own arguments. See Sua confessione, &c. 

Suos llbercs negllgit, et ad eorum arbltrium Wndlnemque v'tvPre 
sinit. Cic. — " He neglects his children, and lets them live 
according to their own will and pleasure." 

Super subjectam materiam. Law Phrase. — " Upon the matter 
submitted." A solicitor is not responsible for his acts 
when founded super subjectam materiam, i. e. on the state- 
ment submitted to him by his client, which has turned out 
to be false. 

Superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est. VlRG. — See 

Quicquid erit, &c. 

Siiperat quoniam fortuna, sequdmur ; 

Quoque vocat vertdmus iter. VlRG. 

— " Since fortune compels us, let us follow ; and whither 
she calls, let us direct our course." 

Superbi homines in convwiis stulti sunt. — " Proud men in 
their cups become fools." Wine, like death, is a leveller 
of distinctions. 

Supersedeas. Law Lat. — "You may supersede." Tou may 
set aside or annul. The title of a writ to stay proceed- 
ings in any case. 

Si/persf/tio, in qud inest indnis timor Dei ; rellgio qua Dei 
cultu pio continetur. Cic. — " Superstition is a senseless 
fear of God ; religion, the pious worship of God." 

Sapparasitdri amlco. Plaut. — " To toady one's friend." 

Suppressio veri. — " A suppression of the truth." The with- 
holding, or telling a part only of, the truth. See Suggestio 
falsi. 

Swfm'mum vale.-~~" A last farewell." 

Suprhnumque vaic 

Vix dixit. Ovid. 

— " And hardly could he bid the last farewelL" 
■2 a 



450 SUR— SYL 

Surdo fdbiilam narras. — " You tell your story to a deaf 
man ; " — to one who does not listen to you. 

Surgit amdri illiquid. Lucb. — " Something bitter 

arises." See Medio de, &c. 

Sursutn corda. — "Lift up your hearts." Lament, iii. 41. 

Sus erat in prttio. Ovid. — " Pigs were in request." 

Sus Mint nam. Prov. — " A pig (teaching) Minerva." 

Suspectum semper invisumque dominnntihus qui proxhnus ties- 
tinantur. Tacit. — " He who is the next heir is alw a\ s sus- 
pected and hated by those who hold the supreme power." 

Smtpenditm per collum. Law Lot. — " Let him be banged 
by the neck." The judge's order for the execution ol a 
criminal, usually written Sus. per coll. 

Sit.y/o nsos pedes pont!re. Quint. — "To walk on tiptoe." 

Sustine et abstine. — "Bear and forbear." A maxim of ESpio 
' us. 

Sustlneas ut onus, nitendum vertfee pleno est ; 

At flecti nervos si pat id re, cadet. Ovid. 

—"To sustain a burden, you must strive with the head 
fully erect ; should you suffer the muscleB to bend, it 
will fall." 

Suitm cuique. — " His own to every one." Let each have his 
own. 

Suum cuique decus postffitas rependet. — " Posterity will give 
to every man his due." 

Suum cuique incommodum ferendum est,potius quam de altrrius 
commodis detrahendum. ClC. — "Every man should bear 
his own grievances, rather than abridge the comforts of 
another." 

Suum cuique pulchrum. Prov. — " Every man's own is beauti- 
ful." " Every man thinks his own geese swans." See 
Quisquis amat, &c. 

Suum cuique tribuere, ea demum summa justitia est. ClC. — 
" To give to every man his due, that in fact is supreme 
justice." 

Suus cuique mos. Ter. — "Every man has his way." 

Sylosontis chlamys. Prov. — " The scarf of Syloson." Sylo- 
son gave to kin£ Darius a rich scarf or mantle, and in re- 
turn received the sovereignty of Samos. Hence, this 
term was applied to the gifts of those who " Throw a sprat 
to catch a herring." 



SYL— TAC. 451 

— — Sylvas inter reptdre salilbres, 

Curantem quicquid dignum sapiente bonoque est. Hor. 
— " To stroll among the healthful groves, meditating ou 
whatever is worthy of the wise and the good." 



T. 

Tabesne cadavrra solvat, 

An rogus, hand refert. Lucak. 

— " Whether corruption dissolve the carcase, or whether 
the funeral pile, it matters not." 

Tabula in naufriigio. — " A plank in a shipwreck." A last 
resource. The benefit secured by a posterior mortgagee 
by getting in an outstanding term, and thus gaining pre- 
cedence over a prior mortgagee. A phrase used till re- 
cently in the courts of Equity. 

Tabula rasa. — "A smoothed" or "planed tablet." This 
expression is used by metaphysicians to indicate the state 
of*the human mind before it has received any impressions. 
The ancients used tablets covered with wax, on which 
they wrote with an iron instrument called a stylus, one 
end of which was broad and flat, for obliterating what had 
been written by smoothing the wax. Hence the expres- 
sion. 

Tacent, satis laudant. Ter. — "In being silent, they give 
sufficient praise." The silence of the censorious may be 
considered as so much praise. 

Tacita bona est mulier semper quam loquens. Plaut. — " A 
silent woman is always better than a talkative one." 

Taeltce magis et occultce inimlcitia? timendas sunt, quam indictee 
et opertce. Cic. — " Enmity unavowed and concealed is 
more to be feared than when open and declared." 

. Taciturn vivit sub pectore vulnus. Virg. — " The secret 

wound still lives within his breast." The sense of in- 
jury still remains. 

- Tacitus pasci si corvus posset, haberei 

Plus dapis, et rixa multo minus invidiceque. Hor. 
— " If the crow could have only fed in silence, he would 
have had more to eat, and much less contention and envy." 
In allusion to the Fable of t\ e Fox and the Crow. 
2 o 



452 TjF.D— TAM. 

T<edet cceh convexa tueri. Viho. — "I am wear} of 

looking upon the canopy of heaven." 

Tcedium vita. — "Weariness of life." Ennui. The state 
of the man who has had every desire gratified, hut who 
can satisfy none. 

Tale tiium carmen nobis, divine poeta, 

Quale sopor fessis. VlBG. 

— "Thy song is to us, divine poet, as sleep to the weary." 
These words are sometimes used sarcastically in reference 
to poets whose lines " remind one, not in vain, of sleep." 

Tales sunt honunum mentes, quali pater ipse 
Jupiter auctiprd lustravit lumine terras. 
— " The mindB of men are according as father Jupiter shed 
light upon various lands with his fertilizing light." A 
translation by Cicero from Homer's Odyssey, B. xviii. 11. 
135, 136; quoted by St. Augustin. 

Tarn consentier.fibus mihi sensibus nemo est in terris. Cic. — 
" There is not a man in the world whose sentiments so 
perfectly agree with my own." 

Tarn deest avdro quod habet, quam quod non habet. Syr. — 
" The miser is as much in want of that which he pos- 
sesses as of that which he does not possess." Because he 
has not the courage to make use of it. 

Tamficti pravique tenax quam nuncia veri. VlBG. — "As 
ready to propagate falsehood and calumny, as to proclaim 
the truth." 

Tamfrictum ego ilium reddam, quamfrictum est cicer. Plaut. 
— " I '11 have him parched as well as ever pea was parch- 
ed." 

Tarn Marte quam Minervd. Prov. — " As much by Mars as 
by Minerva." As much by courage as by wisdom. 

Tarn Marti quam Mercurio. — "As much for Mars as for 
Mercury." Equally qualified for war and for diplomacy. 

Tarn scepe nostrum di-cipi Fabullum, quid 

Mirdris, Aule ? Semper bonus homo tiro est. Mabt. 

— " Why wonder, Aulus, that our friend Fabullus is so 

often deceived ? The virtuous man is always a novice." 

Tamen cantdbltis, Arcades, inquit, 
^[ontlbus haoc vestris : soli cantdre per'iti 
Arcades. O mihi turn quam molllter ossa quiescant, 
Vestra meos olim sijistula dicat am ores ! Visa. 



TA]\I— TAN. 453 

— " And yet you, Arcadians, will sing these woes of aiine 
upon your hills, — Arcadians, alone skilled in song. Oh ! 
how softly will my bones repose, if your pipe in times to 
come shall sing my loves ! " 

Tarn en me 
Cum magnis vixisse inv'ita fatHbttur usque 

Invidia. Hor. 

— " Nevertheless, even envy, however unwilling, will have 
to admit that I have lived among the great." 

Tandem poculum mceroris exhausit. Cic. — " He has exhausted 
at last the cup of grief." He has drained the cup of sor- 
row to the very dregs. 

Tangere ulcus. Ter. — " To touch a sore." To reopen a 
wound. Figuratively, to renew one's grief. 

Tanquam Arglvum clypeum abstulerit, ita gloridtur. — " He 
boasts as though he had gained an Argive shield." "Both 
among the Greeks and Eomans it was considered dis- 
graceful to lose the shield in battle, and equally meritori- 
ous to gain one. See JRelictd non bene, &c. 

Tanquam in speculum. — " As though in a mirror." A the- 
atrical motto. 

Tanquam nobtlis. — " As though noble." Noble by courtesy. 

Tanquam ungues dlgttosque suos. Prov. — " As well as his 
own nails and fingers." He knows the matter as well as 
if it were " at his fingers' ends." 

Tanta est discordia fratrum. Ovid. — " So great is the 

discord of brothers." The quarrels of kinsmen are gener- 
ally the most inveterate. See Acerrima proximorum, &c. 

Tanta est quaerendi cura decoris. Juv. — " So great is 

their care in seeking to adorn their persons." 

Tanta vis probitdtis est ut earn vel in Us, quos nunquam vidi- 
mus, vel, quod magis est, in hoste etiam diligdmus. Cic. — 
" There is so great a power in honesty, that we love it 
even in those whom we have never seen, or, what is still 
more, in an enemy even." 

Tantcene dntmis coslestibus irce? Vieg. — "Can such 

wrath exist in heavenly minds ? " 

Tantalus a labris sttiens fugientia capiat 

Flumlna. Hor. 

— " Tantalus, athirst, catches at the water which recedes 
from his lips." 



451 TAN. 

Tanti eris aliis, quanti tibi Jurris. ClC. — "You will be of 
as much value to others as you are to yourself." 

Tanti est quanti est fungus piifidus. Plaut. — "He is worth 
just as much as a rotten mushroom." 

Tanti quantum habeas sis. — " You will be valued at what you 
are worth." 

Tanto homlnijidus, tantee virtntis amdtor. — " Faithful to such 
a man, a lover of virtue so great." 

Tanto in moerore jacet, ut ab illo recreari nullo modo possit. 
Cic. — " He is so prostrated by excessive grief, that he 
cannot, by any effort, be diverted from it." 

Tanto major Jama sitis est, quam 

Vxrtutis. Jut. 

— " So much greater is the thirst for fame than for virtue." 
See Quis enim, &c. 

Tantum bona valent, quantum vendipossunt. Coke. — " Things 
are worth just as much as they will sell for." " The worth 
of a thing is what it will bring." 

Tantum cibi et potionis adhibendum est, ut rejiciantur vires, 
non ut opprimantur. ClC. — " Just so much meat and 
drink should be used as to re'invigorate our powers, not to 
oppress them." 

Tantum de medio sumptis accPdit honoris. Hon. — " So much 
honour is due to subjects taken from middle life." The 
poet alludes to theatrical representations, the subject of 
which is drawn from those common occurrences which in- 
terest every one, and find sympathy in the breast of all 
below the rank of kings and heroes. 

Tantum inter densas, umbrosa cacumuna, fagos 
Assidue vPniebat ; ibi haec incondlta solus 
Montlbus et sylvis studio j 'act abat indni. Vibo. 
— " Only among the dense beeches, lofty and umbrageous, 
did he constantly come ; there in solitude with unavailing 
fondness did he utter to the mountains and woods these 
untutored lines." 

Tantum magna suo debet Verona Catullo, 

Quantum parva suo Mantua Virgllio. Mabt. 

— " As much does great Verona owe to her Catullus, as 

little Mantua is indebted to her Virgil." 

Tantum quantum. — " Just as much as." 

Tantum religio potuit suadtre malurum. Lu^B. — " To deeds 



TAN— TAU. 455 

so dreadful couid religion prompt." Said with reference 
to the sacrifice of Iphigenia by her father Agamemnon. 
See Quantum religio, &c. 

Tantum se fortunes permittunt, etiam ut natiiram dediscant. 
Quint. Curt. — "They so entirely devote themselves to 
the pursuit of fortune, that their very nature is changed." 

— Tantum series juncturaque pollet. Hor. — "Of such con- 
sequence are system and connexion." Two indispensable 
features in a book which proposes to treat of one subject. 

Tantumne ab re tud est otii tibi, 
AliPna ut cures, edque nihil qua ad te atfinent ? Ter. 
— " Have you so much leisure from your own affairs, that 
you can attend to those of others, those which don't con- 
cern you ? " This passage is followed by the famous one, 
" Homo sum" &c, which see. 

Tantus amor jlormn, et generandi gloria mellis. ViRG. — 
" Such is their love of flowers, and their pride in producing 
honey." In allusion to the habits of bees. 

Tantus amor laudum, tanta? est victoria euros. Virg. — " Such 
is the love of praise, so great the desire for victory." 

Tarda sit ilia dies, et nostro serior cevo. Ovid. — " May that 
day be slow to come, and deferred beyond our times ! " 
A wish expressed for the prolongation of the life of Au- 
gustus. 

Tarda solet magnis rebus inesse fides. Ovid. — " Confidence 
is wont to be slowly given to great undertakings." Look 
for instance at the ridicule which was showered on "Wmser, 
who first proposed to light the streets with gas. 

Tarda venit dictis difficilisque fides. Ovid. — " Credence is 
given to his words tardily and with difficulty." 

Tarde benefictre nolle est ; vel tarde velle nolentis est. Sen. 
— " To be slow in conferring a favour is to grudge it ; even 
to be slow in consenting is to seem to grudge it." 
Tarde, quae crPdlta Icedunt, 

Credlmus. Ovid. 

— " We are slow to believe what, if believed, would cause 
us sorrow." " The wish is father to the thought." 

Tardo amlco nihil est quicquam inlquius. Plaut. — 

" There is nothing more vexing than a tardy friend." See 
Gratia ab, &c. 

Taurum toilet qui vUiilum sustulerit. Prov. — "He who hae 



ioG IB— TEM. 

carried the calf will be able to carry the ox." The foroe 
of habit or custom. 

Te Drum hutiLi mux. — "We praise thee, God." The be- 
ginning of the Doxology, or hymn of St. Ambrose. 

Te putat Me sua caplum nidbre cullnce ; 

iVec male conjectat. Jut. 

— " He looks upon you as captivated by the savoury smell 
from his kitchen. Nor does he conjecture amiss." 

Teque pidcula nulla resolvent. Hoe. — " No atonement will 
absolve you." 

Te sine, nil al/>-m mens inchnat. Vino. — "Without 

thy aid, my mind can compass nothing great." 

Te veniente die, te decedente canebat. Viro. — " Thee did he 
sing as day approached, thee as it departed." A punster 
has thus rendered it : — 

" At morning he sang the praises of tea, 
The praises of tea too at ev'ning sang he." 

Tecum hablta. Pers. — " Live with yourself." * Keep within 
compass." Don't exceed your means. 

Tecum vlvtre amem, tecum dbeam libens. Hon. — " AVith 
thee I could wish to live, with thee I could cheerfully 
die." J 

TPgimen direpta lebni 

Pellis erat. Ovid. 

— " A skin stripped from the lion was his covering." 

Teipsum non alens, canes alis. Prov. — "Unable to keep 
yourself, you are keeping dogs." Said to a needy person 
who finds money to spend on superfluities. 

Ti-lPphus et Peleus, cum pauper et exul uterque, 
Prbjicit ampullas, et sesquipeddlia verba, 
Si curat cor spectantis tetigisse querfla. Hor. 
— " Telephus and Peleus, when they are both in poverty 
and exile, lay aside their bombastic expressions and their 
words half a yard long, when it is their object to move the 
heart of their hearers by their complaint." 

Telum imbelle sine ictu. Virg. — "A feeble dart, de- 
void of force." Applied figuratively to a weak and value- 
less argument. 

Temeritas est fiorentis eetdtis, prudentia senescentis. ClC. — 
" Eashness belongs to vigorous youth, prudence to old 
age." 



TEM. 457 

7\*nWttU nunquam cum prudentid commistetur. Cic. — 
" Jiashness is never united with prudence." 

Temperantia est ratibnis in libidmem at que in alios non rectos 
impetus animi jirma et moderdta domindtio. Cic. — " Tem- 
perance is the firm and temperate dominion of reason over 
our passions and the other unlawful impulses of the 
mind." 

Temperantia sedat appetition.es et efflcit ut Tics rectce rationi 
pdreant. Cic. — "Temperance allays the appetites and 
makes them obedient to reason." 

Temperdtce suaves sunt argutice, 

ImmodicoB offendunt. Phjjd. 

— " Witticisms well-timed are pleasing ; out of place they 
disgust." 

Tempest as mindtur antequam surgat. 

Crepant adificia antequam corriiant. Sen. 
— " The tempest threatens before it bursts upon us. 
Houses creak before they fall." As Campbell says, 
" Coming events cast their shadows before." 

Tempestdte contentibnis, serenttas caritdtis obumhrdtur. — 
" Amid the storms of contention the serenity of Christian 
charity is obscured." 

Templa quam dilecta! — "Temples, how beloved!" From 
Psalm lxxxiv. 1. Motto of the Duke of Buckingham. A 
pun on the family name, Temple. 

Tempora labuntur, tacltisque senesclmus annis ; 
Et fugiunt freeno non remorante dies. Ovid. 
— " Time glides on, and with noiseless years we reach old 
age ; the days flee away with no rein to check them." 

Tempora mutantur, nos et mutdmur in illis. — " Times change, 
and we change with them." See Omnia mutantur, &c. 

Tempora si fuerint nublla, solus eris. Ovid. — See Donee 
eris, &c. 

Tetnpora sic fiigiunt pdrtter, partterque sequuntur, 

Et nova sunt semper. Nam quodfuit ante, relictum est; 
Fitque quod haudfuerat ; momentaque cuncta novantur. 

Ovid. 
— "Thus do the moments ever fly on, and ever follow, 
and are for ever renewed. For the moment which was 
before is past, and that which was not is now ; every mo- 
ment is replaced by another." 



4XJ8 TEM— TEN. 

Tempore crevit amor, qui nunc est summus, habendi : 

Vix ultra, quo jam progrfduitur, habet. Ovid. 

— "With time increased that love of acquiring which is 
now at its height ; and hardly is there a further point to 
which it can proceed." 

Tempore dficitur hngo fortasse cicatrix ; 

Horrent admotas vulnrra cruda manus. Ovid. 
— " A wound may, perhaps, in course of time he closed ; 
but, when fresh, it shudders at the approach of tho hand." 
Applicable also to the wounds of the heart. 

Tempore ftl'ici multi numcrantur amid ; 

Si fortuna perit, null u# amicus erit. Ovid. 

— " In happy times we reckon many friends ; if fortune 

fails, no friend will be left." See Ubi opes, &c. 

Tempiiri parendum. — " We must go with the times." A fa- 
vourite maxim of the Emperor Theodosius II. 

Tempfiris ars medicina fere est. Ovid. — " The healing 

art is mostly a work of time." 

Tempbris illius colui favique pottos. Ovid. — " I have hon- 
oured and cherished the poets of those davs." 

Tempus abire tibi est, ne 

Rideat et pulset lasciva decent ius (ft as. Hor. 
— " It is time for you to be gone, lest that age, which 
plays the wanton with more propriety, should ridicule and 
drive you off the stage." Addressed to an aged sensualist. 
See Lusisti satis, <fcc. 

Tempus aril ma rei. — " Time is the soul of business." 

Tempus edax rerum. Hor. — " Time, the devourer of all 

things." 

Tempus erit, quo vos spPculum vidisse pignbit. Ovid. — " The 
time will come when you will look in your mirror with 
regret." 

Tempus est qucedam pars ceternitdtis. ClC. — " Time is a cer- 
tain part of eternity." Moments constitute eternity. 

Tempus fugit. — " Time flies." 

Tempus omnia revelat. — "Time reveals all things." 

Tendon Achillis. — "The tendon of Achilles." The tendon 
which passes from the muscle of the calf to the heel. The 
fable was that Achilles was held by his mother Thetis by 
this part, when she dipped him in the river Styx, to ren- 
der him invulnerable in the other parts of his body. 



TEN— TEE. 459 

TvnPros ariimos aliena opprobria soepe 

Absterrent vitiis. Hob. 

— " The disgrace of others often deters tender minds from 
vice." 

I Tenet insandbile multos 

Scribendi cacoi'thes. Juv. 

I — " An incurable itch for writing possesses many." 

i Tentenda via est qua me quoque possim 

J TolPre humo, victorque virum volitdre per ora. VlBG. 

J — " I too must attempt a way by which I may raise my- 
self from the ground, and triumphantly hover about the 

' lips of men." 

Teres atque rotundus. Hob. — "A man polished and 

i round." See Quisnam igitur, &c. 

Terra antiqua, potens arrnis atque ubere glebce. Vieg. — " An 

i ancient land, powerful in arms and in the richness of the 

1 soil." Said with reference to ancient Italy. 

VTerra firma. — " Dry land," in contra-distinction to sea. 

Terra incognita. — " An unknown land." When a man goes, 
as we say, " out of his depth," he is said to venture on a 

j. " terra incognita." 

•Terra malos homines nunc educat, atque pusillos. Juv. — 
" The earth now supports many bad and weak men." The 
complaint of every age. 

Terra salfififPras herbas, eademque nocentes 
Nutrit, et urticae proxima scepe rosa est. Ovid. 
— " The earth produces both wholesome and deleterious 
plants, and the rose is often close to the nettle." 

Terras filing. — " A son of the earth." An Oxford student, 
who in former times was apppointed to recite a satirical 
poem at the University Acts, was so called. A satirical 
work against the Jacobite tendencies of that university, by 
Nicholas Amhurst, (London, 1726,) bears this name. 

. Terrce 

I Pingue solum primis extemplo e mensibus anni 

Fortes invertant tauri. ViBG. 

— " Let your stout oxen turn up the rich soil from tlio 
very earliest months of the year." 

Trrram coslo miscent. — " They mingle heaven and earth." 
They create utter confusion. 



180 TEK— TIB. 

Ti rrrt, lustrat, agit. Proserpina, Luna, Diana. 
I ma, Supn'ma, Feras. Ski pt ro, Fltlgdte, Sagittd. 

— In reading these lines, which express the triple cbarao 
ters and attributes of Diana, we must take each word in 
conjunction with the third that follows. It will then read 
thus — 

Terret Proserpina ima sceptro. 
Lustrat Luna suprema fulgore. 
Agit Diana feras sagittd. 
" Proserpine terrifies the realms below with her sceptre. 
Luna illumines the realms above with her splendour. 
Diana chases the wild beasts with her arrows." 

Tertium quid. — "A third something." Produced by the 
union or collision of two opposite forces. 

Tertius e coelo cecldit Cato. Juv. — "A third Cato has 

dropt from heaven!" Sometimes used ironically. 

Tetrum ante omnia vultum. Juv. — " A countenance 

hideous beyond conception." 

Thesaurus carbbnes erant. Prov. — " The treasure turned out 
charcoal." Said of speculations which end in loss. Among 
the ancients charcoal was strewed in the trench winch 
was made as the dividing line between the fields of differ- 
ent owners. This, when covered up, would serve to show 
the boundaries for ages. 

Thesi'd pectora juncta fide. Ovid. — " Hearts united in 

a Thesean attachment." In allusion to the friendship be- 
tween Theseus and Pirithous, king of the Lapitlue. 

Thus auttcum. Prov. — " Court incense." The flatteries and 
promises of courtiers. 

Tibi adversus me non compHit ha?c actio. Law Phrase. — " Tou 
have no right of action against me in this matter." A 
legal plea, by the defendant, in exception. 

Tibi nullum periculum esse perspicio, quod quidem sejunetum 
sit ab omnium interltu. Cic. — " I can see no danger to 
which you are exposed, apart from that which threatens 
the destruction of us all." 

■ ■ Tibi, qui turpi secernis honestum. Hoe. — " To thee who 
can distinguish right from wrong." 

Tibi, Tantale, nulla 
Deprenduntur aqua?, quceque imnvinet effugil arbos. Ovtd. 



TIB— TOL. 4tfl 

— " By thee, Tantalus, no waters are readied, and tho 

tree which overhangs thee starts away." See Tantalus 

a, &c. 
Tibi tanto sumptui esse, mihi rnolestum est. Plaut. — " It 

gives me concern to put you to such expense." 
Tigrulis evlta sodalitdtem. Prov. — " Shun the companionship 

of the tiger." 
Tigris agit rabldd cum tl gride pacem 

Perpf'tuam, scevis inter se convPnit ursis. Juv. 

— " The ferocious tiger always agrees with his fellow, the 

bear consorts with the bear." 
Timeo Ddnixos, et dona ferentes. Vieg. — " I fear the 

Greeks, even when they bring presents." Kindness 

proffered by an enemy is to be suspected. 
Timidi est optdre necem. — " It is the act of a coward to wish 

for death." " Cowards haste to die, the brave live on." 
Timidi mater non jiet. Prov. — "The mother of the coward 

does not weep." Because he will take care to keep out 

of danger. 
Timidi nunquam statuerunt trophceum. Prov. — " The timid 

never erected a trophy." Similar to our saying, " Faint 

heart never won fair lady." 
Timidus Plutus. Prov. — " Plutus is full of fears." Riches 

are a cause of anxiety. 
Timidus se vocat cautum, parcum sordldus. Syr. — " The 

coward calls himself cautious, the miser thrifty." We 

palliate our faults by glossing them with the names of the 

neighbouring virtues. 
Timor unus erat ; fades non una timoris. Otid. — 

" Their fear was the same ; but not so the symptoms of 

their fear." 
Tolle jocos — non estjocus esse malignum. — "Away with such 

jokes, there is no joke in being spiteful." A warning 

against ill-natured sarcasms. See Sint sales, &c. 
Tolle moras, semper nocuit differre paratis. LuCAN. — " Away 

with delay," &c. See Semper nocuit, &c. 
Tolle periclum, 

Jam vaga prosiliet fr&nxs natiira rembtis. Hoe. 

— " Take away the danger, and vagrant nature will eoou 

leap beyond bounds, when restraints are removed." 
Tollenti onus auxiliare, deponenti nequdquam Pri*v. — "As- 



W2 TOL -TOT. 

gist him who is ready to carry the burden, not him who 
declines it." 

Tollrre nodosatn nescit mediclna poddgram. Ovid. — " Medi- 
cine knows not how to cure the nodous gout." 

Tolllmur in caelum curvdto gurglte, et idem 

Subductd ad Manes imos descendhnus inula. Vieo. 
— " "We are raised to the skies on the swelling wave, and 
again, by its subsiding, descend to the lowest depths of 
the abyss." 

■ Tolluntur in alt urn 

I ~t lapsu graviore want. • Claud. 

— " 1 hey are raised aloft, that they may fall with a more 

signal ruin." See Celsce graviore, &c. 

Torqueat hunc oris mutua gumma sui. Ovtd. — " Let the 
borrowed sum of money be his torment." 

Tbrquet ab obsccenis jam nunc sermunlbus aurem; 
Mox etiam pectus praceptis format amlcis, 
Asperitdtis et invidiam corrector et ira. Hoe. 

— "The poet keeps from the child's ear all obscene dis- 
course ; and then in time he forms his heart with friendly 
precepts, the corrector of his rudeness, envy, and passion." 

Torrens dicendi copia mult is, 

Et sua mortljyra est facundia. Juv. 

— " To many the copious fluency of speech and their very 
eloquence is fatal." It was so with Cicero. 

Tot capita, tot sensus. Tee. — " So many heads, so many 
ideas." " So many men, so many minds." 

lot pHrfter pelves, tot tintinndbula dicas 

Pulsdri. Juv. 

— " You would say that so many basons were being beaten, 
so many bells ringing at once." 

Tct tantisque rebus urgemur et premlmur, ut nullam allevia- 
tionem quisquam non stultisstmus sperdre di'bPat. ClC. — 
" We are embarrassed and overwhelmed by so many and 
weighty matters, that no man, who is not the greatest 
fool, can hope for any remission." 

Mota hujus mundi concordia ex discord Us constat. Sett.-^ 
"The whole concord of this world consists in discords." 

lotajacet Babylon ; destruxit tecta Lutherus, 
Calvlnus muros, sed funddmenta Soclnus. 
— " All Babylon lies prostrate ; Luther destroyed the roo£ 



TOT— TEA. 103 

Calvin the walla, but Socinus the foundations." A So- 
einian boast, on the disasters brought on the Boinish 
Church by the Reformation. 

Totldem verbis. — " In so many words." He expressed him- 
self totidem verbis — in just so many words as I have used, 
and no more. 

Tuties quoties. Law Term. — " As often, so often." As often 
as the offence is committed, so often will the penalty be 
enforced. Also applied to a lease, granted by a lessee 
who derives immediately from a bishop, to a second lessee, 
in which the first binds himself to renew to his sub-lessee 
as often as the bishop shall renew to him. This is called 
a Toties quoties lease. 

Totis dubus, Afer, heec niihi narras, 
Hit teneo melius ista, quam meum nomen. Mart. 
— " You are telling me this, Afer, every day, and I know 
these things better than I do my own name." 

Totius autem injustitice nulla capitdlior est, quam eorum qui 
quum maxime fallunt, id agunt, ut viri boni esse videantur. 
Cic. — "But of all injustice, there is none more heinous 
than the acts of those who, when they most deceive us, 
act so as to be taken for good men." 

Toto cozlo. — " By the whole heavens." As widely as the ex- 
tent of the heavens. Signifying the greatest possible dif- 
ference. 

Tot urn tnundum agit histrio. — "The player appears in every 
character." 

Totus in toto, et totus in qudlibet parte. — " Whole in its en- 
tirety, and whole in every part." The definition given by 
the ancient schoolmen of the human mind. 

Totus mundus agit histrionem. — " All the world acts the 
player." "All the world's a stage, and all the men and 
women merely players." — Shaksp. 

TradUus, non victus. — Betrayed, not conquered." 

Trahit homines suis illecebris ad verum decus virtus. Cic. — 
"Virtue by her charms allures man to true honour." 

Trahit ipse fur oris 

Impetus, et visum est lenti qu&sisse nocentem. Ltjcan. 
— "The violence of their rage hurries them on, and to 
inquire who is guilty seems to them a waste of time." 
Applied to those who in the moment of fanatical or civic 



K>4 TRA— TBI 

frenzy are icady to slaughter all supposed foes who eom« 
in their reach. Witness the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, 
and the first French Bevolution. 

Trahit sua quemque voluptas. Vibg. — "Each man is 

led by his own tastes." 

Transeat in exemplum. — " Let it stand as an example." Let 
it pass into a precedent. 

TrZpide concursans, occupata in otio. Ph jed. — " Hurriedly 
running to and fro, busily engaged in idleness." 

Tres mihi convivce prope dissentire videntur, 
Poscentes vario tnultum diversa paldto. 

Quid dem t Quid non dem ? Hoe. 

— " Three guests can scarcely be found to agree, requiring 
very different dishes with varying palates. What shall I 
give them ? what shall I not give f" 

Tria juncta in uno. — " Three joined in one." Sometimes 
applied to the Trinity, but more frequently to a political 
coalition. 

Tria sunt quae prcp*t are debet orator, ut doceat, mSveat, delect et. 
Quintill. — "There are three things which an orator should 
excel in, — instructing, moving, and pleasing." 

Tribus Ant7ci/ris caput insandbde. IlOR. — "A 

head incurable by the three Anticyne even." The three 
places known by this name were famous for the growth 
of hellebore, which was used for the cure of melancholy 
madness. 

—Trinacria quondam 

Italia? pars unafuit, sed pontus et cestus 

MutavPre situm. Claud. 

— " Trinacria was once a part of Italy, but the sea and the 
tides have changed its state." In allusion to a tradition 
that Sicily (called Trinacria from its three corners) was 
once a part of Italy. 

Trinoda necessitas. — " A threefold necessity." A threefold 
tax among the Saxons was so called ; being levied for the 
repair of bridges, the maintenance of garrisons, and tho 
repelling of invaders. No person was exempted from it. 

Triste lupus stabiilis, maturis frvcjlbus imbres, 

Arboribus venti, nobis Amaryllidis ircp. ViRO. 

— -" The wolf is fatal to the flocks, showers to ripened corn, 

winds to the trees, the wrath of Amaryllis to me." 



TBI— TXT. 4tf5 

■ " ■ Tristia moestum 
Vultum verba decent, irdtum plena mindrum. Hon. 

— " Grave words befit a sorrowful countenance, those full 

of menace an angry one." 
Tristis eris, si solus eris. Ovid. — " You will be sad if 

you are alone." 
Trojafuit. Lucan. — "Troy was." Aptly applied to one 

fallen from his high estate. See Fuit Ilium. 
Tros Tyriusve mihi nullo discrtmine agetur. Virg. — " Trojan 

or Tyrian, it shall make no difference to me." 
Triidltur dies die. Hoe. — " One day treads on the heels of 

another." 
Trux tactu herba. — "A herb rough to be handled." 
Tu autem. — " But thou." A hint to a person to leave off or 

be gone. The words " Tu autem, Domine, miserere nostri," 

("But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us,") were used 

by the preacher at the end of his discourse, and hence 

were considered as a notice that service was concluded. 
— Tu die mecum quo pignore certes. Virg. — " Tell me 

for what stake you will contend." Say what you will 

bet. 
Tu doces. — "Thou tea-chest." A punning motto, said to 

have been placed by a facetious Cantab on his tea-caddy. 
Tu, dum tua navis in alto est, 

Hoc age ne mutdta retrorsum teferat aura. Hor. 

— "Do you, while your bark is on the sea, be on your 

guard, lest a changing breeze bear you back again." 

Tu falldci nimium ne crede lucernes. Ovid. — " Do not 

trust too much to the deceiving lamp." In judging of 

female beauty. 
Tu fortis sis ammo, et tua moderdtio, constantia, eorum in- 

fdmet injuriam. Cic. — " Do you be resolute in mind, anc 

your patient and firm endurance will stamp with infamy 

the injuries they have inflicted on you." 
Tu mihi magnus Apollo. Virg. — (Slightly altered.) 

"Thou [shalt be] my great Apollo." Tou shall be my 

oracle. 

Tu mihi solus eras. Ovid. — " Tou were my only one." 

Said by a mother on losing her only child. 
Tu ne qucesieris, scire nefas, quern mihi, auem tibi. 

J H 



4GG TU 

Finem Di dedPrint, Leuconoe, nee Babylonios 

Tentdris numPros. Hob. 

— " Do not inquire, Leuconoe, for we are not permitted 
to know, bow long a term of life the gods have granted to 
you, or to me; neither consult the Chalda;an tables." — 
The tables of the judicial astrologers. 

Tu pol si sapis, quod scis nescis. Tee. — "You, by Jove, it 
you are wise, do not know what you do know." You 
will hold your tongue about it. 

Tu puPros 8omno fraudas, tradisque magistris ; 

Ut siibeant tPnPrce verbera seeva manus. Ovid. 

— " Tis thou who dost defraud boys of their sleep, and 

dost hand them over to their masters, that their tender 

hands may suffer the cruel stripes." An address to the 

morning. 

Tu, quamcunque Deus tibi fortundvPrit horam, 
Oratd sume manu ; nee dulcia differ in annum, 
Ut quocunque locofuPris, vixisse libenter 
Te dicas. Hor. 

— " Whatever happy moments God may have granted 
you, receive them with a thankful hand, and defer not the 
comforts of life to another year ; that, in whatever place 
you are, you may say you have Mved with satisfaction." 

Tu quid ego, et populus mecum, desldPret, audi. Hon. — 
" Hear what I, and the public too, desire." Addressed to 
dramatic writers, who ought to consult the taste of the 
public. 

Tu quidem ex ore orationem mihi eripis. Plaut. — " You 
really are taking the words out of my mouth." 

Tu quoque. — "You too." A retort in the same words is 
called a Tu quoque. "You're another." 

Tu quoque, Brute ! — "You too, Brutus ! " The expression 
used by Julius Caesar on seeing his supposed friend, 
Brutus, in the number of his assassins. It is sometimes 
represented as " Et tu, Brute ! " 

Tu quoque ne propera; melius tuafllia nubet. Ovid. — " Be 
not in haste : your daughter will make a better match." 

Tu recte vivis, si euros esse quod audis. Hoe. — " You live 
well if you make it your care to be what you seem." 

Tu semper ora, Tu protege, Tuque labora. — " Do you always 
pray for the rest, do you protect the rest, and do vou 



TU— TUN. 4G7 

labour for the rest." Quoted by Bacon, as illustrative of 
the grounds of tenure by frankalmoigne, knight-service, 
and socage. 

Tu si dntmum vicisti, potius quam anmius te, est quod gaudeas. 
Plaut. — " If you have conquered your inclination, rather 
than your inclination you, there is something for you to 
rejoice at." 

Tua ratio existimetur acuta, meum consilium necessdrium. 
Cic. — "Your judgment may be considered acute, yet 
my advice may be necessary." 

— — Tua res agttur, paries dim proximus ardet. Hob. — 
" Your own property is at stake, when your neighbour's 
house is on fire." See Proximus a, &c, and Proximus 
ardet, &c. 

Tui observantisslmus. — "Tours most obediently." 

Turn comix plena pluviam vocat improba voce, 

Et sola in sicca secum spatidtur arena. VlRG. 

— "Then the prating crow, with loud note, invites the 
rain, and solitary stalks by herself on the dry sand." One 
of the symptoms of rain mentioned by Virgil. 

Turn dentque homines nostra intelligimus bona 

Cum qiKE in potestdte habuimus, ea amlsimus. Plaut. 
— " We men know our blessings, only when we have lost 
what we once enjoyed." 

Turn equtdem in senectd hoc deputo miserrlmum, sentlre ea 
tetdte se odiosum alteri. — " For my part I think that to a 
person advanced in years it must be a most unfortunate 
thing to feel conscious that at that time of life he is hated 
by another." 

Turn excidit omnis constantia, et mors non dubia ociilos ccepit 
obducere. Peteon. Arbiter. — " Then did all our courage 
fail, and certain death began to stare us in the face." 

Tunc et aves tutas movere per aera pennas ; 
Et lepus impnvidus mediis errdvit in agns ; 
Nee sua credulttas piscem suspendPrat homo 
Guncta sine insldiis, nullamque timentia fraudem, 

PUnnque pacts erant. Otld 

— "Then did the birds wing their way m safety in the 
air, and the hare without fear range over the fields ; not 
then had its own credulity suspended the fish from the 
hook. E ny place was without treachery, in dread of nc 
2 h 2 



4GS TUN— TUE. 

injury, and full of peace." A description of the Golden 

A £ e : 

Tune impilne hac facias t Tune hie hSmfnes adolescentulos 
ImpHrltos rerum, eductos libere, in fraudem UTicis 

Sollicitando? et pollicitando eorum anlmos lactas ? Tee. 

— " Are you to be acting this way with impunity ? are you 
to be luring here into snares, young men unacquainted with 
the world, and liberally brought up, by tempting them, and 
to be playing upon their fancies by making promises?" 

Tunica pallio propior. Prov. — " My shirt is nearer than 
my coat." " Near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin." 
" Charity begins at home." 

Tuo tibijudicio est utendum ; virtntis et vitiorum grave ipsius 
conscientix pondus est ; qua subldtd jacent omnia. Cic. — 
" In your own guidance you must be directed by your own 
judgment ; the influence of conscience is great in weighing 
your own virtues and vices ; take this away and all is at an 
end." 

Tuque, ! diibiis ne dPfice rebus. Vieg. — " And thou, 

oh ! do not abandon me in my doubtful fortunes." 

Turba gravis pad, placidceque inimlca quiHi. Maet. — " A 
multitude hostile to peace, and a foe to quiet ease." 
ha JRemi sVquitur fortiinam, ut semper, et odit 

Damnritos. Juv. 

— " The mob of Remus follows Fortune, as mobs always 
do, and hates those she has condemned." 

Turdus ipse sibi malum cacat. Prov. — "The thrush sows 
misfortunes for itself." A foolish man " makes a rod for 
his own back." It was said that the thrush feeds on the 
seeds of the mistletoe, and, sowing them with its excre- 
ments, provides the bird-lime with which it is caught. 

Turpe est aliud loqui, aliud senttre ; quanto turpius aliud 
scribere, aliud sentlre ! Sen. — "It is base to say one 
thing and to think another ; how much more base to write 
one thing and to think another ! " The latter, being more 
deliberate, and its effects more lasting, is in every way more 
pernicious. 

Turpe est diffieiles habere nugas, 

Et stultus labor est ineptidrum. Maet. 

— "It is disgraceful to make difficulties of trifles, and 

labour on frivolities is folly." 



TUR. 4t50 

Turpe est lauddri ab illauddtis. — " It is base to be praised by 

those who are undeserving of praise," — whose censure is 

really praise. See Laudari a, &c. 
Turpe est viro id in quo quotldie versdtur ignordre. — " It is 

a shame for any man to be ignorant of that in which he is 

daily engaged." 
Turpe quidem dictu, sed si modo vera fatemur, 

Vulgus amicitias utilitdte probat. Ovid. 

— " It is a shocking thing to be owned, but, if we must 

confess the truth, the multitude esteems friendship ac- 
cording to interest." 
Turpe senex miles, turpe senilis amor. Ovid. — " For an old 

man to be a soldier is shocking, amorousness in an old 

man is shocking." 
Turpe, vir et mulier, juncti modo, prdtinus hostes. Ovid. — 

" 'Tis a shocking thing for a man and woman, just united, 

to be enemies at once." 
Turpes amores concilidre. — " To form low attachments." 
Turpi fregerunt scecula luxu 

Divitice molles. Juv. 

— " Enervating wealth has corrupted the age by vicious 

luxury." 
Turpis est qui alto sole in lecto dormiens jacet, qui vigildre 

media die inclpit, qui qfficia lucis noctisque pervertit. Sen. 

— " It is disgraceful to be lying asleep when the sun is on 

high ; to awake at mid-day, and to turn day into night, 

and night into day." 
Turpis et ridicula res est elementdrius senex ; jiiveni parandum, 

seni utendum est. Sen. — " An old man learning his rudi- 
ments is a disgraceful and ridiculous object; it is for the 

youth to acquire, the old man to apply." 
Turpis in reum omnis exprobrdtio. — " All reproach cast upon 

a person unconvicted is unwarrantable." 
Turpisstma est jactura quce Jit per negligentiam. Sen. — 

" That loss is the most disgraceful which arises from 

neglect." 
Turpiter obtlcuit, subldto jure nocendi. Hor. — " The right 

of abusing taken away, it disgracefully became silent." 

Said of the abuses of the Chorus, in the Old Comedy, but 

susceptible of a general application. 
Turpius ejicitur quam non admitCitur hospes. Ovid. — " It is 



470 TTJR— UBE. 

more disgraceful to expel a guest than not to admit 
him." 

Turturd loqudcior. Prov. — " More noisy than a turtle-dove." 

Tussis ferina. — " A harking cough." 

Tuta est hommum tenultas ; 

Magna periclo sunt opes obnoxiee. Ph^d. 
— " Poverty is safe ; great riches are liable to danger." 

Tula frequensque via est per am'icum fallere women : 

Tuta frequent licet sit via, crimen habet. Ovid. 

— " Secure and much frequented is the path for deceiving 
under the name of friendship ; secure and much fre- 
quented though that path be, it is to be condemned." 

Tufa petant alii. Fortuna miserrima tuta est ; 

Nam timor eventUs dethribris abest. Ovid. 

— " Let others seek safety. The most wretched fate affords 

its security ; for all fear of worse fortune is withdrawn." 

Tuta scUera esse possunt, non secura. Sen. — " The wicked 
may be safe, but not secure." Not free from care. 

Tuta timens. Viro. — " Fearing even safety." 

Tute hoc intristi, tibi omne est exedendum. Teb. — "You 
yourself have hashed up all this, so you must swallow it." 

Tutius errdtur ex parte mitibri. Law Max. — " It is safest to 
err on the side of mercy." 

Tutos pete, ndvtta, portus ; 

Ventus ab occdsu grandlne mixtns erit. Ovtd. 

— " Seek, mariner, the safety of the harbour ; from the 

west there will be a wind mingled with hail." 

Tutum silentii preemium. — " The reward of silence is sure." 
" Least said soonest mended." 

Tutus ille non est quern omnes oderunt. — " He is not safe who 
is hated by all." 

Tuum tibi narro somnium. Prov. — " I '11 tell you your own 
dreams." An answer which we may aptly give to those 
who pretend to know more about our affairs than we do 
ourselves, 

TJ. 

Uberibus semper lacrymis, semperque pardtis 
In statione sua, atque expectantibus illam 
Quojubeal manure modo. — — JlTV. 



UBE— UBT. 471 

— " "With tears always in abundance, always at com- 
mand in their place, and ready to flow as she may bid 
them." 

Uberrima fides. — " Boundless confidence." Implicit faith. 

JJbi amici, ibi opes. Prov. — " Where there are friends there 
is wealth." Similar to our saying, "It is better to have 
friends without money than money without friends." 

JJbi aut quails est tua mens ? potesne dicere ? Cic. — " Where 
is your mind, or what is its nature ? Can you tell ? " 

JJbi bene, ibi patria. Prov. — " Where I am well off", there is 
my country." The motto of the unpatriotic and selfish man. 

JJbi idem et maximus et Jionestissimus amor est, dliquando 
prcestat morte jungi quam vita distrahi. Valer. Maxim. 
— " Where there exists the greatest and most genuine 
love, it is sometimes better to be united in death than 
separated in life." 

JJbi inerit amor, condimentum cuivis pldciturum credo. Platjt. 
— " Where love is an ingredient, the seasoning, I believe, 
will please any one." 

JJbi jam vdlidis quassdtum est viribus cevi 
Corpus, et obtusis ceciderunt viribus artus, 
Claudicat ingenium, delirat lingudque mensque. Lucr. 
— "When the body is shaken by the mighty power of 
time, and the limbs fail, their strength being blunted, the 
genius halts, and both mind and tongue are at fault." 

JJbi jus, ibi remedium. Law Max. — " Where there is a right, 
there is a remedy." 

JJbi jus Incertum, ibi jus nullum. Law Max. — "Where the 
law is uncertain, there is no law." 

JJbi major pars est, ibi est totum. Law Max. — " Where the 
greater part is, there is the whole." In deliberative as- 
semblies, the vote of the majority binds the whole. 

JJbi mel, ibi apes. Plaut. — " Where there is honey, there 
will be bees." Where there is attraction, there will be no 
want of admirers. 

JJbi mens plurima, ibi minima fortuna. Prov. — " Where 
there is most mind, there is least money." See Fortuna 
nimium, &c. 

— — JJbi non est pudor, 

Nee cura juris, sanctitas, piHas, fides, 
Instdbile regnum est. Sen. 



•172 UBI— ULT. 

- -"Where there is not modesty, respect for the iaws, re- 
ligion, piety, and faith, the government is insecure." 

Ubi opes ibi amlci. — "Where there is wealth, there will 
there be friends." 

Ubi qui* dolet, ibi et manum frequent habet. Prov. — " Where 
a man feels the pain, there will he often place his hand." 

Ubi summits imperdtor non adest ad excrctum, 
Citius quod non facto 'st ususfit, quam quod facto 'st opus. 

Plaut. 
— " When the commander in chief is not with the army, 
that is sooner done which ought not to be done than that 
which ought to be done." 

Ubi supra. — " Where mentioned above." 

Ubi titnor adest, sapientia adesse nequit. Lactantiub. — 
'• \\ In iv War is present, wisdom cannot be present." 

Ubi tres medlci, duo athei. — " Where there are three phy- 
sicians, there are two atheists." A mediaeval proverb. 

Ubi vanus dnlmus, aurd captus frivdld, 
Arrlpuit insolentem sibi fiduciam, 
Facile ad derlsum stulta iPvltas ducltur. Phjed. 
— " When a weak mind, beguiled by frivolous applause, 
has once given way to insolent self-sufficiency, its foolish 
vanity is easily exposed to ridicule." 

Ubi vulnerdtus est cubitus brdchium est in/irmum. Prov.- — 
" Where the elbow is wounded the arm is powerless." 

Ubicunque ars ostentdtur, Veritas abesse vidPtur. — " Wherever 
art is displayed, truth seems to be wanting." 

Udum et molle lutum es, nunc, nunc prfiperandus, et acri 

Fingendus sine fine rota. I ' i; it s . 

— "You are now clay, moist and pliant; at once and 
unintermittingly you must be fashioned on the rapid 
wheel." " Youth and white paper take any impres- 
sion." 

Ulcera dnlmi sananda magis quam corporis. — " The wounds 
of the mind need healing more than those of the body." 

UUrrius ne tende bdiis. Vikg. — " Proceed no further 

with thy hatred." The appeal of Turnus to JEneas. 

Ultima ratio regum. — " The last argument of kings." This 
motto was engraved on the French cannon by order of 
Louis XIV. 
Ultima semper 



ULT— TJNG. 473 

Expectanda dies homini, diclque bedtus 

Ante obitum nemo supre.maque funera debet. Ovi». 

— " The last day of life must always be awaited by man, 

and no one should be pronounced happy before his death 

and his last obsequies." Similar to the famous reply of 

Solon to Croesus, the wealthy king of Lydia. 

Ultima Thule. Virg. — " Remotest Thule." The extremity 
of the earth, as known to the Romans. Supposed to have 
been the Faroe Islands. See Venient annis, &c. 

Ultra vires nihil aggrediendum. Prov. — " We should at- 
tempt nothing beyond our strength." 

Uliilas Athenas portas. Prov. — " You are carrying owls to 
Athens." Similar to our saying, " You are carrying coals 
to Newcastle." Owls abounded at Athens. 

Umbra pro corpore. Prov. — " The shadow for the body." 
The shadow instead of the substance. 

Umbram suam metutre. — " To be afraid of his own shadow." 

Una dies aperit, conflcit una dies. Auson. — " In one day it 
blossoms, in one decays.". 

Una dies inttreat inter maxlmam civltdtem ac nullam. Sen. 
— " One day may make all the difference between the 
greatest city and none at all." Said in reference to the 
ruin which may be at all times impending over the for- 
tunes of mankind. 

Una domus non alit duos canes. Prov. — " One house cannot 
keep two dogs." See Canes socium, &c. 

Una eddemque manus vulnus opemque ferat. — " Let one and 
the same hand bring both wound and remedy." Adapted 
from Ovid. 

Una solus victis nullam sperdre salutem. Virg. — •" The only 
safety for the conquered is to hope for no safety." Their 
only hope is in the bravery prompted by despair. 

Una voce. — " With one voice.'" Unanimously. 

Unde habeas quccrit nemo ; sed oportet habere. Juv. — 
" Whence your wealth comes, nobody inquires ; but wealth 
you must have." 

Unde tibi frontem llbertdtemque parentis, 

Gum facias ppjora senex ? Juv. 

— " Whence do you derive the air and authority of a pa- 
rent, when you, who are old, commit greater faults ?" 

Ungentem pungit, pungentem rustlcus ungit. Prov.'— " A 



471 UNG— UNU. 

clown will show harshness to one who anoints hirc., but 
will anoint the man who is harsh to him." A man of low 
mind is apt to treat kindness with insult, but to fawn 
upon those who treat him as their inferior. 

Unguibus et rostro. Prov. — " With nails and beak." "With 
all one's powers. " Tooth and nail." 

Unguis in ulcere. Cic. — " A nail in the wound." Words 
addressed by Cicero to Catiline the conspirator, who, 
when his country was already wounded by factions, fixed 
his talons in the wound, to keep it open. 

— — Uni ,i 'i u us virtuti, atque ejus amlcis. Hob. — " Tolerant 
to virtue alone and to her friends." Said of Lucilius, who 
satirized the foibles of the great of his time. The first 
three words form the motto of the Earl of Mansfield. 

Uni navi ne committas omnia. Prov. — " Venture not all in 
one bottom." 

Unfco digitulo scalpit caput. Prov. — " He scratches his head 
with one little finger." Said of brainless and effeminate 
men, as this was a habit with the fops of Greece and Borne. 

Unigenitus. — The bull issued by pope Clement XI. in 1713, 
against the doctrines of the Jansenists, is known by this 
name, from its beginning " Unigenitus Dei Filius," — " The 
only-begotten Son of God." 

Unius dementia dementes efficit multos. Prov. — " The mad- 
ness of one makes many. mad." " One fool makes many." 

Universus hie mundus una civitas hommum recte existirndtur. 
Cic. — "The whole world is rightly deemed one city of 
mankind." See Non sum uni, <fec, and Socrates quidem, &c. 

Uno avulso, non deficit alter. Vieg. — "One removed, 

another is not wanting." 

Uno ore omnes omnia 
Bona dicere, et lauddre fortunas meas, 
Qui gnatum haberem tali ingenio praditum. Ter. 
— " Everybody, with one voice, began to say all kinds of 
flattering things, and to extol my good fortune in having 
a son endowed with such a disposition." 

Units homo nobis cunctando restttuit rem ; 
Non ponebal enim rumores ante salutem. Fragm. o^" Ennuis. 
— " One man, by delay, saved the state-; for he cared less 
for what was said than for the public welfare." Said in 
praise of Fabius Cunctator, or the Delayer. 



UNU— URL 475 

Unus in hoc populo nemo est, qui forte Latlne 

Qucelibet e medio reddere verba queat. Ovid. 

— " There is no one in all this people who can by any 

chance translate into Latin words in common use." 

Unus JPellceo jiiveni non swfficit orbis ; 
JEstuat infelix angusto llmite mundi. Juv. 
— " One globe does not suffice for the youth of Pella ; 
the unhappy man frets at the narrow limits of the world." 
Said of Alexander the Great. 

Unus utrlque 

Error ; sed variis illudit partibus. Hob, 

— " There is the same error on both sides, only the illusion 
takes different directions." Different men pursue the 
same illusion, though by different paths. 

Unus vir nullus vir. Prov. — " One man is no man." 

Unusquisque abundat sensu suo. — " Every person abounds 
in his own sense." Is wise in his own conceit. 

Urdtur vestis ambre tuce. Ovid. — " Let him be in- 
flamed by love of your very dress." 

Urbe silent totd ; vitreoque madentia rore 

Tempora noctis eunt. Ovid. 

— " 'Tis silence throughout the city ; damp with the glist- 
ening dew, the hours of night glide on." 

Urbem Idteritiam invenit, marmoream rellquit. Suet. — " He 
found a city of bricks, he left a city of marble." This, 
Augustus said, he did for Rome. 

Urbem quam dicunt Romam, Melibcee, putdvi, 

Stultus ego, huic nostree similem. Vibg. 

— " The city, Meliboeus, which they call Rome, I in my 
simplicity imagined to be like this of ours." 

Urbi pater est, urblque maritus. Juv. — " He is a father 

to the city and a husband to the city." Facetiously quoted 
with reference to a man of intrigue. 

Urbs oritur, (quis tunc hoc ulli credere posset . ? ) 
Victorem terris impdsitiira pedem. Ovid. 

— " A city arises (who then could have believed this tale 
from any one ?) destined one day to place her conquering 
foot on all lands." 

Urit grata proterottas, 
Et vultus riimium lubricus asp'ici. Hob. 



476 TJRI— UT. 

— " Her pleasing coquetry inflames me, ami her features 
too dazzling for my gaze." 

I 'rit mature urtica vera. Prov. — " The real nettle stings 
early." A vindictive disposition is early seen. 

Urtlcce proximo sape rosa est. Ovid. — " The nettle is 

often next to the rose." 

Usque ad aras. — " To the very altars." To the last extremity. 

Usque ad nauseam. — " Even to sickness." Properly a medical 
phrase, but often used as moaning, "Till we are quite 
sick and tired of it." 

Usque ad sidera tellus. — " Earth exalts itself to the stars." 

Usque adeone mori rnistrum est ? Vihg. — " Is it then 

so very dreadful to die ? " 

■ Usque adeone 
Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter? Pers. 
— " Is then your knowledge nothing worth, unless others 
know that you possess it 't " Is not the knowledge you 
have acquired a source of comfort to you, without refer- 
ence to the opinions of others? 

I 'sit peritus liariolo velocior 

Vulgo essefertur. Pu.ed. 

— " One taught by experience is proverbially said to be 
more quick-witted than a wizard." 

Usus est tyr annus. — " Custom is a tyrant." 

Usus promptum facit. Prov. — " Practice makes perfect." 

Ut acerbum est, pro benefactis cum mali messem metas. Plattt. 
— " How hard it is, when, for services done, you reap a 
harvest of evil." 

Ut ager, quamvis fertllis, sine culturd fructuosus esse non 
potest, sic sine doctrind animus. Sen. — " As a soil, al- 
though rich, cannot be productive without culture, so the 
mind without learning cannot be fruitful." 

Ut ameris, amdbllis esto. Ovid. — " That you may be 

loved, be loveable." See Sit procul, &c. 

Ut canis e Nilo. Prov. — " Like the dog at the Nile." Hogs, 
in drinking at the Nile, Phanlrus says, are obliged to be 
on their guard against the crocodiles, and therefore lap as 
they run. Hence this proverb is applied to persons of 
desultory and careless habits. After Marc Antony ran 
away from the battle of Actium, it was said of him that, 



T7T. 477 

Ut canes in JEgypto, bibJ etfugit, " Like the dogs in Egypt, 
he drank and ran away." 

Ut cuique homini res partita est,firmi amici sunt ; si res lassa 
labat, 

Itidem amici collabascunt. Plaut. 

— "According as wealth is obtained by each man, so are 
his friends sure ; if his prospects fade, his friends fade 
with them." 

Ut desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas. Ovid. — " Thcugh 
the power is wanting, yet the will deserves praise." 

Jit ejus modestiam cognbvi, gravis tibi nulla in re erit. Cic. 
— " As I am well acquainted with his modesty, he will in 
no way be troublesome to you." 

Ut homines sunt, ita inorem geras ; 
Vita quam sit brevis, simul cugita. Plaut. 
— " As men are, so must you treat them. At the same 
time reflect how short life is." 

Ut homo est, ita morem geras. Tek. — "As a man is, so 
must you treat him." 

Ut id ostendPrem, quod te isti fa cilem put ant, 
Id nonjiPri ex vera vita, neque adeo ex aquo et bono, 
Sed ex assentando, indulgendo, et largiendo. Ter. 

— " That I may convince you that they consider you a 
kind-hearted man, not for your real life, nor indeed lor 
your virtue and justice ; but from your humouring, in- 
dulging, and pampering them." 

Ut in vita, sic in studiis, pulcherrimum et humanisslmum ex- 
istlmo sevP.rittitem comittitemque miscere, ne ilia in tristttimn, 
hac in pPtulantiam procedat. Pliny the Younger. — " As 
in our lives, so in our pursuits, I deem it most becoming 
and most proper so to unite gravity with cheerfulness, that 
the former may not degenerate into melancholy, nor the 
latter into licentiousness." 

Ut jPtgulent homines, surgunt de node latrones. Hor. — 
" Robbers rise by night that they may cut the throats of 
others." We sometimes hear ol " stabbing a man in the 
dark.' 

Ut lupus ovem amat. Prov. — " As the wolf loves the sheep." 

Ut metus ad omnes, poena ad paucos perveniret. Law Max. — 
" That fear may reach all, punishment but few." A maxim 
of the Criminal Law, and the object of all laws. 



478 UT. 

Ut navem, ut eedificium idem distruit facilTtme qui const writ ; 
sic humlnem eadem opttme, qua conylutinavit, nafitra dis~ 
solvit. Cic. — "As he most easily destroys a ship or a 
house who has constructed it, so does that nature most 
becomingly effect man's dissolution which first put him 
together." He speaks of the natural decay which returns 
man to his " native earth." 

— — Ut nee pes, nee caput uni 

Redd/it ur forma. Hob. 

— " So that neither the head nor foot shall correspond to 
the same figure." Applicable to a literary production or 
a picture of an incongruous character, of which we can 
make " neither head nor tail." 

Ut nemo in sese tentat descendere, nemo ! 
Sed pracPdenti spectdtur manttca tergo. Pees. 
— "How is it that no man tries to search into himself? 
not a man but fixes his eye on the wallet upon the back 
of him who goes before." The Fable is here alluded to, 
which describes men as walking in a line, each having a 
wallet containing his faults on his back, while those of his 
neighbour are in another slung before. See Peras im- 
posuit, Ac. 

Ut dtium in tittle vertPrem negd/ium. — " That I might turn 
my leisure into useful occupation." 

Ut placeas, debes immPmor esse tui. Ovid. — " To please, 
you ought to be forgetful of yourself." 

Ut plerumque solent, naso suspendis actito 
Jgndtos. Hob. 

— " As is the way with most, you turn up your nose at 
those of obscure birth." 

Ut populus, sic sacerdos. Prov. — " Like priest, like people." 
Quoted by St. Bernard, who preached the Second Crusade. 

UtpuPris placeas, et declamdtio Jias. Juv. — " To amuse chil- 
dren, and be the subject of a theme." " To point a moral 
and adorn a tale." — Johnson. See 1 demens, &c. 

Ut queant laxis resonare Jibris 
Miro gestorUm famuli tuorum, 
Solve polluti labii redtum. 

— " That thy servants may be able to sing thy wondrous 
deeds to the loosened strings, release them from the stair. 
of polluted guilt." These lines, from the Hymn of John 



TTT. 479 

the Baptist, contain the names originally given to the 

notes in Music, Ut, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol, La. They are said to 

have been given by Guido, a Benedictine monk of Arezzo, 

in the eleventh century. The note Si was afterwards 

added by a musician named Le Maire. 
Ut quimus, quando ut volumus non licet. Tee. — " As we can, 

when we cannot as we wish." 
Ut quisque suuni vult esse, ita est. Tee. — " As every person 

wishes his child to be, so he is." The mind of the child 

is so plastic, that it will admit of any training on the part 

of the parent. See Udum et, &c. 
Ut rei servlre suave est ! Plaut. — " How delightful it is to 

keep one's money ! " 
Ut ridentibus arrldent, ita jlentlbus adflent, 

Humfini vultus. Hoe. 

— " The human countenance, as it smiles on those who 

smile, so does it weep with those who weep." 
Ut scepe summa ingenia in occulto latent ! Plaut. — " How 

often are the greatest geniuses buried in obscurity ! " 
Ut sementem feceris, ita et metes. Cic. — " As you sow, so 

shall you reap." " As you make your bed, so you must 

lie on it." 
Ut servi volunt esse lierum, ita solet esse ; 

Bonis boni sunt ; improbi cui malus fuit. Plaut. 

— " As servants would have their master to be, such is he 

wont to be. Masters are good to the good, severe to him 

who is bad." 
Ut solent poetce. Pliny the Younger. — " As it usually is 

with poets." — i. e. living on a scanty diet. 
Ut solet accipiter trPpidas agitdre columbas. Ovid. — "As 

the hawk is wont to pursue the trembling doves." 
Ut sunt humana, nihil est perpetuum. Plaut. — "As human 

affairs go, nothing is everlasting." 
Ut supra. — "As above stated." 
Ut sylvce fdliis pronos mutantur in annos, 

Prima cadunt ; ita verborum vetus interit &tas, 

Et jiivenum ritu florent modb nata vigentque. 

Debemus morti nos nostraque Hoe. 

— " As, in the woods, the leaves are changed with each 

fleeting year, and the earliest fall the first ; in like manner 

do words perish with old age, and those of more recent 



4S0 UT— TJTI. 

birth Sourish and thrive like men in the time of youth 
We ami our works are doomed to death." 

1 1 (amen hoc ita sit, munus tua grande voluntas 
Ad me pervinit, consutiturque boni. Ovid. 

— " Hut though it is so, your good wishes have come as a 
great boon to me, and are taken in good part." 

If tu fort fi nam, sic nos te, Celse,feremus. Hob. — "As ycu 
bear with your fortunes. (Visas, so shall we boar with 
you." 

It tute es, item omnes censes esse. Plaut. — "As you are 
yourself, you take all others to be." 

I'ttititr motu <i n) mi, qui uti rat'wne non potest. — "Let him 
be guided by impulse who cannot be guided by reason." 

Utcunque in alto ventus est, exin velum vertitur. Plaut. — 
" Whichever way the wind is at sea, in that direction the 
sail is shifted." 

Vtendum est estate; cito pede h'tbltur cetas. Ovid. — "We 
must make use of time ; time flies with rapid foot." 

Uterque bonus belli pacisque minister. — " Skilled equally in 
the administration of peace or of war." 

Uti possidetis. — "As you now possess." A term in di- 
plomacy, meaning that, at the termination of a war, each 
party is to retain whatever territory he may have gained 
in the contest. Its opposite is the Status quo, which >• , 

Utile dulci. — "The useful with the agreeable." See Omits 
tulit, &c. 

Tlllltas juvandi. — "The advantage of assisting others." 

UtUltas lateat : quod non profitibere fiet. Ovid. — "Let jroui 
object lie concealed: that will come to pass which you 
shall not avow." 

I'tiliumque sagax rerum, et div'ma futuri. Hoe. — " Skilled 
in wise suggestions, and prophetic of the future." 

Uttnam tarn facile verainvenlre possem, quam falsa convincPre ! 
Cic. — " AVould that I could as easily find out the truth, 
as I can detect what is false ! " 

Uttnam veteres mores, vHeres parsimonia? 
Potius majori honori hie essent, quam mores mali. Plai;t 
— "I only wish that the old-fashioned ways and the old- 
fashioned thriftiness were in greater esteem here, than 
these bad ways." 

Utttur anatlnd fortiina cum exit ex aqua", vret. — " He has tin 2 



UTI— VAD. 481 

food fortune of a duck, as soon as he comes out of the 

water he is dry." Said of those fortunate men who 

always " fall on their legs." An adaptation from Plautus. 
Utltur, in re non dubid, testibus non necessdriis. Cic— -" He 

employs unnecessary proofs in a matter on which there is 

no doubt." 
Utque alios industria, ita hunc igndvia ad famam prottilPrat. 

Tacit. — " As industrious efforts have advanced others, so 

did this man attain celebrity by indolence." 
Utrum horum mavis acclpe. — " Take which you will of the 

two." 
JJtrumque vitium est, et omnibus cn'dPre et nulli. Sen. — " It 

is equally a fault to confide in all, and in none." 
Uvdque conspectd livorem ducit ab uvd. J try. — " And grape 

contracts paleness from the grape which it has faced." 
Uxdrem fato credat obesse sno. Ovid. — " He may think that 

his wife is an obstacle to his success." 
Uxdrem malam obolo non emerem. — " I would not give a doit 

for a bad wife." 
Uxdrem, Posthiime, ducis f 

Die qua TtslphonP, quibus exdgltdre col fibrin. Juv. 

— " What, Posthumus, marry a wife ? by what Fury, say, 

by what serpents, are you driven to madness ? " 
Uxori nubPre nolo meae. Mabt. — " I will not be married 

to a wife." I will not have a wife who shall be my master. 

The verb nubo was only used in reference to the female 

sex. The man marries, the woman is married. 



V. P. for Vitd patris, which see. 

Vacdre culpa magnum est solatium. ClC. — " It is a great 
solace to be free from fault." 

Vacuus cantat coram latrone viator: Jttt. — " The penniless 
traveller sings in the presence of robbers." 

Vade in pace. — " Go in peace." According to some authori- 
ties, perpetual solitary imprisonment was thus called in 
tbe middle ages. It is generally, however, considered to 
have been applied to a moro terrible punishment. See 
In pace. 

't i 



4H2 VAD— VAN. 

Vade mecum. — "Go with me." A work which from its 
utility and portability is the constant companion of the 
man of business, or the traveller, is sometimes called hi* 
Vade tnecum. 

Vcb mlsero mihi! quanta de spe decidi ! Ter. — " Woe unto 
wretched me ! from what hopes have I fallen ! " 

Vcb victis ! — " Woe to the conquered ! " We learn from Livy 
and Festus that this was the exclamation of Brennus the 
Gaul, when he. threatened extermination to the .Romans. 

Vale, vale, cave ne tttiibes, tnanddtdque frangas. Hor. — " Fare- 
well ! farewell ! take care lest you stumble, and miscarry 
with my commands." 

Vdleant menddcia vatutn. Ovid. — " Farewell to the fic- 
tions of the poets." 

Videos, anus optima, dixi : 
Quod suptrest cevi, molle sit omne tui. Ovin. 
— " ' Farewell, most worthy dame,' said I, ' tranquil be 
the remainder of your days.' " 

Valeat quantum valere potest. — " Let it have weight, so far as 
it may." Often quoted, Valeat quantum. 

Valeat res ludicra, si me 
Palma negdta macrum, dondta reducit oplmutn. Hor. 
— " Adieu to the levities of verse, if the denial of ap- 
plause is to reduce me to meagreness, and I am to be de- 
pendent on its bestowal for happiness." 

Valtre malo quam dives esse. Cic. — " I would rather be in 
good health than rich." 

Valet anchora virtus. — " Virtue is a sheet-anchor." Motto 
of Viscount Gardner. 

Valet ima summis 

Mutdre, et insignem alttnuat Deus, 

Obsciira promens. Hor. 

— "The Deity is able to make exchange between the 
highest and the lowest, abasing the exalted, and advancing 
the obscure." 

Vatidius est natures testimonium quam doctrines argumentum. 
St. Ambrose. — " The testimony of nature is of greater 
weight than the arguments of learning." 

Valor ecclesiasficus. — " The ecclesiastical value." 

Vana quoque ad veros accessit fama timbres. LUCA.N.— " Idlo 
rumours, too, were added to well-founded fears." 



Y AR— VEL. 483 

Tare, redde legione* ' — "Varus, give me back my legions!" 

The words of Augustus Caesar, on hearing of the defeat 

and slaughter of the Roman army, under Quintilius Varus, 

by the German chieftain Arminius. 
— — Varium et tnutdbUe semper 

Faemtna. VlRG. 

— " Woman is ever changeable and capricious." 
Vastius insurgens decim<e ruit impetus undee. Ovid. — " The 

swell of the tenth wave, rising more impetuously than the 

rest, rushes onward." See Qui venit, &c. 
Tectlgdlia nervi sunt reipublicce. Cic. — " Taxes are the 

sinews of the state." 
VehPmens in utramque partem, aut largitdte nimid aut par- 

simonid. Ter. — " Eeady to run to either extreme, of ex- 
cessive liberality or parsimony." 
Vehlmur in altum. — " We are launching into the deep." 
Teiosque habitante Camillo, 

Illie Romafuit. Lucan. 

— " Camillus dwelling at Veii, Rome was there." Camillus 

was so highly esteemed at Rome, that it was said, " Where 

Camillus is there is Rome." 
Tel cceco appareat. JProv. — " It would be evident to a blind 

man even." 
Vel capillm habetumbram suam. Pub. Syr. — "Even a hair 

has its shadow." 
Telim mehercitle cum istis errdre, quam cum nliis recte sentlre. 

— "By Hercules, I would rather be in the wrong with 

these men than think aright with the others." See Malo 

cum Platone, &c. 
Velim ut velles. Plaut. — " I would wish as you would wish." 
Velis et remis. — " With sails and oars." With all possible 

expedition. 
Telle licet, potlri non licet. — " You may wish, but you may 

not enjoy." You may " look and long." 
Telle suum cuiquam, nee voto v'tvltur uno. Perb. — " Every 

man has his own fancy, and the tastes of all are not alike." 
Tellem in amicitid sic errdremus, et isti 

Errori nomen virtus posuisset honestum. Hor. 

— " Would that in our friendships we committed the same 

mistake, and that virtue would designate such mistakes by 

an honourable name." The poet wishes that men were as 
2 i 2 



Ml YF.L— VEN. 

coiiMilcnite to tlu-ir friends as to tlieir mistresses, and 

equally indulgent to their failings. 
Veldccm tardus assequitur. Prav. — " The slow overtakes the 

swift." In allusion to the Fable of the Hare and the 

Tortoise. " The race is not always to the swift." 
Velucins ac cltius nos 

Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domesfica, magnis 

Cum siibeant anlmos auctbribus. Juv. 

— " The examples of vice which we witness at home more 

surely and more quickly corrupt us ; for they insinuate 

themselves into our minds under the sanction of high 

authority." 
Velocius quam asparagi coquantur. — " Before you could cook 

a bundle of asparagus." A Roman proverb denoting an 

extremely short space of time. Suetonius tells us that it 

was frequently in the mouth of Augustus Csesar. 
Velox consilium stquttur pcenitentia. Syr. — " Repentance 

follows precipitate counsels." 
Velut inter ignes 

Luna minbres. Hob. 

— " Like the moon amid the lesser lights." 
Velut si 

Egrrgio inspersos reprendas corpore ttcevos. Hob. 

— " As if you were to condemn moles scattered over a 

beautiful skin." 
Veliiti in speculum. — " As though in a mirror." A theatrical 

motto. 
Venalis poptilus, vendlis curia patrum. — " The people venal, 

the house of senators venal." The state of Rome in the 

times of its decadence. 
Venator stqultur fiigientia, capta relinquit ; 

Semper et inventis ultfribra petit. Ovid. 

— " The huntsman follows the prey that flies, that which 

is caught he leaves behind : and he is ever on the search 

for still more than he has found." 
Vendentem thus et odores, 

Hit piper, et quicquid chartis amicltur ineptis. Hob. 

— "A seller of frankincense, perfumes, and pepper, and 

anything wrapped in worthless paper." To the use of such 

persons he says are consigned the productions of worthies* 

writers. 



YEN. 4S5 

Vendldit hie auro patriam. Vieo. — " He sold his 

country for gold." 

Venerium in auro bibltur. Sen. — " Poison is drunk out of 
gold." A risk not so likely to be incurred by those who 
drink out of less costly vessels. 

Venerdri parentes liberos decet. — " It is the duty of children 
to reverence their parents." 

Venerit insitio ; fac ramum ramus adoptet. Ovtd. — " The 
time for grafting is now come ; make branch adopt branch." 

Vent, Creator Spiritus. — "Come, Holy Ghost, Creator, come." 

Veni Gotham, ubi multos 

Si non omnes vidi stultos. Drunken Barnaby's Journal. 
" Thence to Gotham, where, sure am I, 
If though not all fools, saw I many." 
The men of Gotham, in Nottinghamshire, seem to have 
been proverbial in the Middle Ages for their stupidity, 
and to have been generally known as the " Wise men of 
Gotham." See Ray's Proverbs, p. 218. 

Veni, Sancte Spiritus. — " Come, Holy Ghost." The name 
given to a mass of the Roman Catholic Church, to invoke 
the assistance of the Holy Spirit. 

Veni, vidi, vici. — " I came, I saw, I conquered." The brief 
despatch in which Julius Caesar announced to the senate 
his victory over Pharnaces. 

Venia necessltdti datur. Cic. — " Pardon is granted to neces- 
sity." Similar to our saying that " Necessity has no laws." 
Veniat manus, auxilio quce 

Sit mihi. Hoe. 

— " May there come a hand to give me aid." 

Venient annis 
Scecula seris^ quibus Ocednus 
Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens 
Pateat tellus, Tiphysque novos 
Dettyal orbes ; nee sit terris 
Ultima Thule. Sen. 

— " After the lapse of years, ages will come in which Ocean 
shall relax his chains around the world, and a vast con- 
tinent shall appear, and Tiphys shall explore new regions, 
and Thule shall be no longer the utmost verge of earth." 
Considered by Lord Paeon to be a prophecy of the dis- 
covery of America. See Ultima Thule. 



486 VEX— ATftt. 

V> ; nirnti occurrite morbo. Peiis. — "Meet the ctr/iing 

disease." See Neglecta, &c. and Principiis obsta, Ac. 

H tempus quo ista qua nunc latent in lucem dies extrdhct, 
et longidris eevi diligentia. VPniet tempus quo postrri nostri 
tarn aperta nos nescisse mirabuntur. Cic. — " The day will 
come, when time and the diligence of later ages will Hang 
to light things which now lie concealed. The day will 
come when our posterity will wonder that we were ignor- 
ant of things so evident." 

Venire facias. Law Term. — " You are to cause to come to- 
gether." A judicial writ, whereby the sheriff is com- 
manded to cause a jury to appear, in order to try a cause. 

Venlte, exulthnus Dftmlno. — " Oh come, let us sing unto the 
Lord." The beginning of the 95th Psalm. 

Veniunt a dote sagitta. Juv. — "The darts come from 

her dowry." 

Plutus, not Cupid, touched his sordid heart, 
And 'twas her dower that winged the unerring dart. 

Giford. 

Venter f am ettcus aurtculis caret. — "A hungry belly has no 
ears." It is proof against advice or expostulation. A 
saying of Cato the Elder. 

Venter non habet aures. Prov. — " The belly has no ears." 

Ventis secundis. — " With a fair wind." With prosperous 
gales. Motto of Lord Hood. 

Ventis verba fundis. — " You pour forth words to the winds." 
You talk to no purpose. 

Ventum ad supremum est. Viho. — " Matters have come 

to the last extremity." 

Ver erat aternum ; pldcldique tepenftbus auris 
MulcPbant Zrphyri natos sine sPmlne Jlores. Oyib. 
— " Then it was ever spring ; and the gentle Zephyrs, with 
their soothing breezes, cherished flowers that ^rew un- 
sown." The state of the earth in the Golden Age. 

Ver non semper viret. — " The spring does not always flourish." 
Or, by an heraldic pun, " Vernon always flourishes." 
Motto of Lord Vernon. 

Ver pingit vario gemmantia prata colore. — " The spring decks 
the blooming fields with various colours." 

Vera dico, sed nequicquam, quoniam non vh cn'dpre. — " I speak 
the truth, but in vain, since you will not beUeve me.'* 



VEB. 4K7 

Vera gloria radices agit, atque etiam propagdfur ; ficta omnia 
celeriter, tanquam fiosculi, decidunt ; nee simuldtum potest 
quidquam esse diuturnum. Cto. — " True glory strikes root, 
and even spreads ; all false pretensions fade speedily, 
like flowers; nor indeed can any counterfeit be lasting." 
Carlyle says, " No lie you can speak or act but it will 
come, after longer or shorter circulation, like a bill drawn 
on Nature's reality, and be presented there for payment — 
with the answer, No effects." 
Vera incessu pdtuit Dea. Vieg. — " She stood re- 
vealed a goddess truly in ber gait." 
Vera redit fades, dissimuldta perit. Petron. Arbiter. — 
" Our natural countenance returns, the assumed one passes 
away." Hypocrisy will finally be detected. 
Verba driimi proferre et vitam impendPre vero. Juv. — " To 
give utterance to the sentiments of the heart, and to stake 
one's life for the trutb." 

Verba dat omnis amans. Ovid. — "Every lover gives 

fair words." 
Verba de prcesenti. Law Term. — " Promise made on the 
instant as a pledge for the future." 

Verba fides sPqwitur. Ovid.—" Fulfilment attends his 

words." No sooner said than done. 

Verba fiunt mortuo. Ter. — " You are talking to a dead 

man." You are talking to one who will not heed you. 
Verba ligant homines, taurorum cornna funes. — "Words bind 

men, ropes the horns of bulls." 
Verba nitent phalPris ; at nulla* verba medullas 

Intus habent. Palinoeniub. 

— " His words shine forth in fine compliments, without 
sincerity." Mere sound devoid of meaning. 
Verba placent et vox, et quod corrumpPre non est , 

Quoque minor spes est, hoc magis ille cupit. Ovid. 

— " Her words charm him, her voice, and her incorruptible 
chastity ; and the less hope there is, the more intensely 
does he desire." Said of Lucretia. 
Verba togas sequPris, junctiira callldus acri, 
Ore teres modlco, pallentes rddere mores 
Doctus, et ingPnuo culpam deflgPre ludo. Perb. 
— "You employ the language of the toga, skilful at judi- 
cious combination, with suitable style well rounded, e*- 



488 VEK. 

port at lasting d^prared morals, and inflicting censiiro 
with subtle raillery." The character of a just and con- 
siderate satirist. 

Confined to common life, thy numbers flow, 

And neither soar too high, nor sink too low ; 

There strength and ease in graceful union meet, 

Though polished, subtle, and though poignant, sweet ; 

Yet powerful to abash the front of crime, 

And crimson error's cheek with sportive rhyme. 

Oijford. 

VerMque provtsam rem non invito sequenlur. Hor. — 
"Words will not fail the subject when it is well ton* 
sidered." 

Verbatim et literatim. — "To the word and to the letter." 
Like the word seriatim, neither of these words is really 
Latin, having been coined probably in the Middle Ages. 
The correct Latin would be, Ad verbum et ad literam. 

Verbo tenus. — " In name at least." 

Verborum paupertas, imo egestas. Sen. — "A poverty, or 
rather an utter want, of expression." 

Verbbsa ac grandis epistola venit 

A Capreis. Juv. 

— "A verbose and grandiloquent epistle comes from Ca- 
preae." Said of the haughty mandates issued by the Em- 
peror Tiberius from his palace at Capreae. Now used to 
mark a lofty tone upon slender pretensions. 

Verbum sat sapienti. Prov. — " A word to the wise is suffi- 
cient." 

Verbum verbo reddere,Jidus 

Interpres. Hob. 

— " To render word for word, as a faithful interpreter." 

Vere color redit ossibus. Viro. — " In Spring the flame 

of desire returns to the bones." 

Vere magnum, habere in se fragilitatem hominis, secilrttdtem- 
dei. Sex. — " It is true greatness to have the frailty of a 
man, the equanimity of a god." 

VP.ri'cunddri nPmmem apud mensam decet. Plaut. — " At 
table no one should be bashful." 

V°recundia inufilis viro egenti. Prov. — " Bashfulness is use- 
less to a man in want." A man in distress cannot afford 
to be governed by rigid notions of etiquette. 



VER. 4S9 

Verecundia mulierem, non color fucdtus, ornat. — " Modest} , 
not rouge, adorns a woman." 

Veritas, a quocunque dicitur, a, Deo est. — M Truth, by whom- 
soever spoken, comes from God." Truth is of the Divine 
essence. " God is truth." 

Veritas nihil veretur nisi abscondi. — " Truth fears nothing 
but concealment." Truth seeks publicity. 

Veritas odium par it. — "Truth produces hatred." 

Veritas sermo est simplex. Ammian. — " Truth is simple in 
its language," requiring neither study nor art. 

Veritas vel menddcio corrumpitur vel silentio. Ammian. — 
" Truth is violated by falsehood, or by silence." Silence 
is, in some cases, as bad as a falsehood uttered. 

Veritas vincit. Law. — "Truth conquers." Motto of the 
Scotch Earl Marechal. 

Veritas visu et mora, falsa festinatione et incertis valescunt. 
Tacit. — " Truth is established by scrutiny and delibera- 
tion ; falsehood thrives by precipitation and uncertainty." 

Veritdtis simplex ordtio est. ' Sen. — " The language of truth 
is simple." She stands in need of no meretricious arts. 

Veros amicos repardre difficile est. Sen. — " It is a difficult 
thing to replace true friends." 

Versdte diu quid f err e recicsent, 

Quid vdleant, humeri. Hob. — See Sumite ma- 

teria™, &c. 

Versus inopes rerum, nugceque canorce. Hor. — "Lines 
devoid of meaning ; harmonious trifles." These words 
have been applied to the Opera. 
" What though our songs to wit have no pretence, 
The fiddle-stick shall scrape them into sense." 

Vertentem sese frustra sectdbere canthum, 

Oum rota posterior curras, et in axe secundo. Pees. 
— " You will in vain endeavour to overtake the felly that 
revolves before you, since, as you run, you are the hind 
wheel, and on the second axle." 
" Thou, like the hindmost chariot-wheels, art curst, 
Still to be near, but never to be first." Dry den. 

Vertitur in teneram cdriem, rimisque dehiscit, 

Si qua diu sdlitis cymba vacdrit aquis. Ovid. 

— " If a bark has been long out of the water to which it 



490 VEIt— VES. 

had been accustomed, it turns to crumbling rottenness, 
and gapes wide with leaks." 

Verum decepta avldltas, 
Et quern tenebat ore, demisit cibum, 
Nee quern petebat adeo potuit adtingPre. Ph^ed. 
— " His greediness however was deceived ; he not ouly 
dropped the food which he was holding in his mouth, but 
was after all unable to reach that at which he grasped." 
From the Fable of the Dog and the Shadow. 

Verum est Mud, quod vulgo dldtur, menddcem mhnbrem esse 
oportet. Quint. — " There is truth in the common saying, 
that a liar should have a good memory." 

Verum est verbum, quod memoruiur, ubi amlci ibidem sunt 
opes. Plaut. — " It is a true proverb that is quoted, 
1 Where there are friends, there are riches.' " 

Verum Mud est, vulgo quod dici solet, 

Omnes sibi malle melius esse quam alt?ri. Tee. 

— " The common saying is true, that we all wish matters 

to go better with ourselves than with another." 

Verum opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum. Hor. — " But 
in a long work it is allowable sometimes to be overcome 
by sleep." Occasional negligence may be pardoned in a 
long work, which in a brief one would be reprehensible. 

Verum putas haud cegre, quod valde expetis. — " You have no 
difficulty in believing that to be true which you anxiously 
desire." " The wish is father to the thought." 

Verum ubi plura nitent in carmine, non ego paucis 

Offendar maculis. Hob. 

— " But where many beauties shine in a poem, I will not 
be offended with a few blemishes." See Non ego, &c. 

Verus amicus est is qui est tanquam alter idem. Cio. — " A 
true friend is he who is, as it were, another self." 

Vesdna cup'ido, 

Plurima cum tenuit, plura tenere cupii. 

— " Unreasoning cupidity, the more it has the more it 

desires to have." 

Vestibiilum domus ornamentum est. Prov. — " The hall is tho 
ornament of a house." First impressions are of the great- 
est importance. 

Vestigia nulla retrorsum. — " No stepping back again." Be* 



VES— VIA. 491 

treat must not be thought of. An adaptation from Horace 
The motto of the Earl of Buckinghamshire. 

Vestis virumfacit. Prov. — "The garment makes the man." 
It is so in the opinion of the vulgar. 

Vestri, judlces, hoc maxlme interest, non ex levitate testium 
causas homlnum ponderdri. Cic. — " To you, O judges, it 
is of the greatest moment, that the interests of men should 
not he dealt with upon slight testimony." 
— Vetabo, qui Gereris sacrum 
Vulgdrit arcana, sub isdem 
Sit trabXbus, fragilemve rnecum 

Solvat phaselum. Hoe. 

— " I will forbid the man, who shall have divulged the 
sacred rites of mysterious Ceres, to be under the same roof 
with me, or to sail with me in the same fragile bark." 
From fear of the vengeance of an offended deity. 

Vetera extollimus recentium incuriosi. Tacit. — " "We extol 
things that are ancient, heedless of those of later date." 
See JEtas parentum, &c, and Laudator, &c. 

Vetera quce nunc sunt fuerunt olim nova. — " Things whieh are 
now old, were once new." 

Veterem injuriam ferendo, invltas novani. — " By submitting 
to an old injury, you lay yourself open to a fresh one." 
Even patience must have its limits. See Post folia, &c. 

Veterum id dictum est, Fellclter is sapit, qui perlciilo alieno 
sapit. — " It is an old saying, that he is happy in his wis 
dom, who is wise at the expense of another." From ;m 
interpolated scene in the Mercator of Plautus, probably 
written by Hermolaiis Barbarus. 

Vetustas pro lege semper habetur. Law Max. — " Ancient cus- 
tom is always regarded as law." It is the basis of our 
common law. 

Yextita qucestio. — "A disputed question." A moot point. 

Vi et armis. — " By force and arms." By main force, not by 
sanction of the law. 

Via crucis via lucis. — "The path of the cross the path of 
light." A mediaeval saying, and an heraldic motto. 

Via media. — " The middle way." 

Via trita est tvtissirna Coke. — "The beaten path is the 
safest." 



492 A I A— VIC. 

Tin trita, via ti/ta. — "The beaten path is the safe path." 

M.itto of Earl Norman ton. 
Viamque insiste domandi, 

Dum facile* ariimi jiivPnum, di/m mtibllis <rtas. Viho. 

— "Enter upon ■ course of training while their disposition 

in youth is tractable, while their age is pliant." See Udum. 
Viatn qui nescit qu4 dccrniat ad mtin, 

Eum oportet amnem qtuerPre cSmltem sibi. Plaut. 

— "He who knows not his way to the sea, should take I 

river as his guide." A prolonged route which is certain to 

lead to our object is better than a short but doubtful one. 
Vice gerens. — " Acting in the place of." A vicegerent, or 

deputy. 
Vice regis. — " In the king's behalf." Acting as viceroy. 
Vice versd. — " The terms being reversed." Or " reversely." 

Dr. Parr used to say it ought to be " Versd vice," referring 

to Ulpian, Dig. 43. 29. 111. 
Vicistis cochleam tarditdte. Plaut. — " You have surpassed 

a snail in slowness." 
Victor volentes per populos dat jura. — " A conqueror gives 

laws to a submissive people." 
Victoria concordid crescit. — "Victory increases by concord." 

Motto of Earl Normanton, and Lord Amherst. 
Victoria, et per victoriam vita. — " Victory, and through 

victory life." 
Victoria, et pro victoria vita. — " Victory, and for victory 

life." A toast for heroes. 
Victoria pax non pactione parienda est. Cic. — " Peace is to 

be secured by victory, not by negotiation." 
Vxctrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni. — " The conquering 

cause was pleasing to the gods, the conquered one to 

Cato." An extravagant compliment paid by Lucan to 

the heroic patriotism of Cato of Otica. 
Victrix fortunw sapientia. Juv. — " Wisdom conquers 

fortune." By prudence we may sometimes get the better 

of fortune. 
Victurosque Dei celant, ut v'tvere durent, 

Felix esse mori. LucAtf. 

— " And the gods conceal, from those destined to live, how 

sweet it is to die, that they may continue to live." 



Tictus cultusque corporis ad ralPtildmem rPfPrantur et ad 
vires, non ad voluptdtem. ClC. — " Let the food and cloth- 
ing of the body bear reference to health and strength, not 
to mere gratification." 

Vide licet. — ""You may see." "Namely." Denoted in 
English books by the contracted form, viz. 

Vide ne, funic ilium nimis intendendo, aliquando abrumpas. — 
"Take care, lest by stretching the rope too tight you 
break it at last." 

Vide ut supra. — " See as above." " See the preceding passage." 

Video et gaudeo. — See Videsne qui, &c. 

Video melibra probbque, 

Deteriora sequor. Ovid. 

— " I perceive the better course, and applaud it ; but I 
follow the worse." The words of a person hurried on by 
passion against the dictates of reason. 

Vides, ut altd stet nive candldum 
Soracte, nee jam sust7neant onus 

Silvce laborantes. Hor. 

— " You see how Soracte stands white with deep snow, nor 
can the bending woods any longer support the weight." 

Videsne qui venit ? — "Do you see who is coming?" To 
which the answer is, Video et gaudeo, " I see and am glad." 
Love's Labour's Lost, act v. sc. i. 

Vidf'te, quceso, quid potest pecunia. Plaut. — " See, prithee, 
what money can effect." 

Vidi ego naufragiumque, viros et in a?quore mergi ; 
Et, Nunquam, dixi, justior undafuit. Ovid. 

— " I myself have seen a shipwreck, and men drowned in 
the sea ; and I said, ' Never were the waves more just in 
their retribution.' " 

Vidit et erubuit lympha p'udica Deum. — " The modest water 
saw its God and blushed." A line on the miracle at Cana 
in Galilee, most probably composed by Richard Crashaw. 
Dryden has had the credit of having composed a similar 
line when a school-boy at "Westminster : — 

" The conscious water saw its God and blush'd." 
Tf so, he was probably indebted- to Crashaw for the 
thought. It is, however, a matter of doubt whether the 
!ine of Crashaw did not originally read, " Ngmpha pudica]' 
'■' The modest nymph." 


ViijilanCibiu, n m donnienfibus, subv^niunt jura. Lair Max. — ■ 
"The laws assist the watchful, not those who sleep." The 
law assists those only who tako due care to preserve tlu-ir 
rights. 

Vtgildri deoet hiimlnem, qui vult sua tempSri conflcrre officia. 
Flaut. — " It behoves him to be vigilant who wishes to do 
his duty in good time." 

1'niih'ife et ordte. — " Watch and pray." Motto of Lord 
t 'n-t lfiiiaiiu*. 

Yvjnr etdtis fluit ut flos veris. -"The vigour of manhood 
'•3 away like a flower of spring." 

Vile donum, vilis gratia. Prov. — "A small gift, small 
thanks." 

Vilescunt dignitdtes cum tenant ur ah indignis. Sall. — " 1 1 igfa 
offices become valueless when held by unworthy persons." 

Vilit sajpe cadus nob7le nectar habet. Prov. — " Full oft does 
an humble cask contain generous nectar." A repulsive 
exterior may conceal excellent qualities. 

TUius argentum est auro, virtutibus aurum. Hon. — " Silwr 
is of less value than gold, gold than virtue." 

7 HL'trum cuhninafumant. Vlit. — "The tops of the cottages 
send forth their smoke." 

Vim vi repellrre omnia jura clamant. Law Max. — " All laws 
declare that we may repel force by force." 

Vina parant dnimos, faciuntque caloribus aptos : 

Curafugit multo dilulturque mero. Ovid. 

— " Wine composes the feelings and makes them ready 
BO be inflamed : care flies and is drowned in plenteous 
draughts." 

Vtnee ariimos, iramque tuam, qui ccet?ra vincis. Ovid. — 
" You, who conquer other difficulties, go conquer your own 
feelings and your anger." 

Vincit amor pat ria. Viro. — "The love of our country con- 
quers all other considerations." "The noblest motive is 
the public good." Motto of the Irish Viscount Moles- 
worth, and Lord Muncaster. 

Vincit omnia Veritas. — " Truth conquers all things." How- 
ever veiled by hypocrisy or by fraud, truth will generally 
come to light. Motto of the Baron Kinsale. 

Jlncit qui se vincit. — "He is indeed a conqueror who eon- 
quers himself." Motto of Lord Howard cf WaJden. 


Vinculo, da Ungues, vel tibi vincla dabit. — " Put a curb on 
your tongue, or it will put a curb on you." An iudiscrect 
tongue is very likely to bring us into trouble. 

Vindictam mandasse sat est ; plus nbminis horror 

Quam tuus ensis aget ; minuit prcesentia famam. Lucax. 
— " 'Tis enougb to have commanded vengeance ; more will 
the dread of your name effect than your sword ; your pre- 
sence detracts from your fame." 

Vino diffugiunt morddces cures. — " Cankering cares are dis- 
pelled by wine." An adaptation from Horace. 

Vino tortus et ird. Hoe. — "Excited by wine and 

anger." 

Vinum bonum Icetificat cor Twminis. — " Good wine maketh 
glad the heart of man." See Psalm civ. 15. 

Vinum purum potum, puer,- infundito. 
A summo ad imum more majorum bibunto. 
Decern cyathi summa potto sunto. Lipsius. 

— " Unmix' d be our wine, and pure let it flow, 

As our fathers ordain' d, from the high to the low, 
Let our bumpers, while jovial we give out the toast, 
In gay compotation, be ten at the most." 

Violenta nemo imperia continuit diu ; 
Moderdta durant. Sen. 

— " No one has long held power exercised with violence ; 
moderation insures continuance." 

V'tpera Cappadocem nocitura momordit : at ilia, 
Gustdto periit sanguine Cappddocis. 

— " A baneful viper bit a Uappadocian ; but having tasted 
the Cappadocian's blood it died." A translation from the 
Anthologia Grceca. The people of Cappadocia were of a 
dull disposition, and addicted to every vice. 

Vir bonus dicendi peritus. — " A good man skilled in the art 
of speaking." The ancient definition of an orator. 

Vir bonus est quis? 

Qui consulta patrum, qui leges jurdque servat. Hor. 

— " Who is a good man ? He who obeys the decrees of 

the senators, he who respects the laws and ordinances." 

Vir bonus et sapiens dignis ait esse pardtum, 
N~ec tamen ignorat quid distant (Pra lupin is. Hor. 
— " A good and a wise man declares himself ready to as- 
sist the deserving ; he is not ignorant, however, of the dif- 


ferenee between money and lupines." He is able to dis- 
tinguish between the meritorious and the undeserving. 
Lupines were used for money on the stage. 

Vir est maxima escae. Plaut. — " He is a man of a most 
capacious appetite." 

Vir pietdte gravis. Vibg. — " A man respected for his 

piety." 

Fir sapiens forti mSlior. — " A wise man is better than a 
valiant one." 

Vir sapiens omnia qua in vitam humdnam incurrunt fert 
Uhmter, ut parcat legi natures. Sen. — " A wise man bears 
willingly all those events which are the lot of human life, 
that he may obey the law of nature." 

Vir sapit qui pauca loquitur. — " The man is wise who says 
but little." 

Vires acquirit eundo. Vibo. — "She acquires strength 
as she goes." The poet speaks of Fame, or Rumour. 

Virescit vulnfre virtus. — " Virtue flourishes from a wound." 
Motto of the Earl of Galloway. 

Viri infelicis procul amici. Sen. — " The friends of the un- 
fortunate man are at a distance." 

Viris fortlbus non opus est mceriibus. — " Brave men have no 
need of walls." 

Virtus agrestiores ad se ariimos alllcit. Cic. — " Virtue al- 
lures to herself even the most uncultivated minds." 

Virtus ariZtefortior. — " Virtue is stronger than a battering- 
ram." Motto of the Earl of Abingdon. 

Virtus est medium vitiorum, et utrinque reductum. Hoe. — 
" Virtue is the mean between two vices, and equally re- 
moved from either." The golden mean. 

Virtus est una altisslmis defixa rad/clbus, qua nunquam ulld 
vi labefactari potest. Cic. — " Virtue is a thing which 
having once struck deep root, can never be shaken by any 
power." 

Virtus est vitium fugtre, et sapientia prima 

Stultitid caruisse. Hob. 

— " It is virtue to fly from vice, and the first step of 
wisdom is to be exempt from folly." Temptation is bet- 
ter avoided than combated. 

Virtus hotritnem jungit Deo. Cic. — " Virtue unites man with 
God." 
 

Virtus in actione consistit. — "Virtue consists in action." 

Motto of Lord Craven. 
Virtus in arduis. — "Virtue," or "Valour in danger." 

Adapted from Horace. 
Virtus lauddtur et alget. Juv. — "Virtue is praised and 

starves." 
Virtus mille scuta. — " Virtue is as good as a thousand shields." 

Motto of the Earl of Effingham. 
Virtus non advenit a naturd, neque a doctrlnd, sed a nilmlne 

divlno. Sen. — " Virtue proceeds not from nature, nor 

from education, hut from the Deity." 
Virtus non est virtus nisi comparem habet ttliquem, in quo 

superando vim suam ostendat. ClC. — " Virtue is not 

really virtue unless it has some associate, in excelling 

whom it may display its strength." 
Virtus probata jlorebit. — " Approved virtue will flourish." 

Motto of Earl Bandon. 
Virtus, recludens immeritis mori 

Caelum, negdtd tentat iter vid ; 

Ccetusque vulgar es, et udam 

Spernit humum fiigiente pennd. Hor. 

— "Virtue, throwing open heaven to those who deserve 

not to die, directs her course hy paths hitherto denied, 

and spurns with rapid wing the grovelling crowds and tho 

foggy earth." 
Virtus repulsa? nescia sordidae 

Intdmindtis fulget honoribus ; 

Nee sumit aut ponit secures 

Arbitrio populdris aurae. Hok. 

— " Virtue, which knows no hase repulse, shines with un- 
tarnished honours ; she neither receives nor resigns the 

emblems of authority at the will of popular caprice." 
" Virtue repulsed, yet knows not to repine, 
But shall with unattainted honour shine." Swift. 
Virtus requiei nescia sordidae. — "Virtue which knows not 

mean repose." Motto of the Earl of Dysart. 
Virtus sine rdtiune constdre non potest. Pliny the Younger. 

— " Without reason, virtue cannot subsist." 
Virtus sola nobilitat. — " Virtue alone ennobles." Motto of 

Lord Walscourt. 



Vtrfut. nib cruce crescit, ad cethlra iendens. — "Virtue grows 

under the cross, and tends towards heaven." Motto of t be 

Earl of Charleville. 
Virtus vincit invidiam. — " Virtue subdues envy." Motto of 

Marquis Cornwallis. 
Vxrtute ambire oportet, non favitoribus. 

Sat habet favitbrum semper qui rectefacit. Plaut. 

— " By merit, not by patrons, ought we to seek our ends. 

He who does well has always patrons enough." 
Virtute non astutid. — " By virtue, not by cunning." Motto 

of Viscount Pery. 
Tiit ute, non verbis. — "By virtue, not by words." Motto of 

the Earl of Kerry, and of the Marquis of Lansdowne. 
I'irfi'ite quirs. — "In virtue there is tranquillity." Virtue 

confers peace of mind. Motto of Lord Mul/rave. 
Virtu tern doctrina paret, naturiine donet ? Hob. — " Does 

study produce virtue, or does nature bestow it on us ? " 
Virtutcm inculiimem odimus, 

Subltitam ex dciilis quartmus invldi. Hob. 

— " We hate virtue when present, but gaze after her with 

regret when she has passed from our sight." 
Virtutem verba putes, ut 

Lucum ligna ? Hob. 

— " Do you consider virtue to consist merely of words, as 

a grove consists of trees ? " 
Virtutes ita copuldta? connexteque sunt, ut omnes omnium par- 

ttcipes sint, nee alia ab alia possit separdri. Cic. — '* The 

virtues are so closely joined and connected that they all 

partake of the qualities of each other, nor can they be 

separated." 
Virtuti nihil obstat et armis. — " Nothing can resist valour 

and arms." Motto of the Earl of Aldborough. 
Virtuti non armis fido. — "I trust to virtue, not to arms." 

Motto of the Earl of Wilton. 
Virtitttbus obstat 

Res angusta domi. Juv. 

— " Straitened means stand in the way of virtues " of 

the more active exercise of charitable virtues. 
Virtutis avbrum premium. — "The reward of the valour of 

my forefathers." Motto of Lord Templetou. 

Virtutis ergo. — " For the sake of virtue." 
Virtutis expers verbis jactans gloriam 

Ignotos fallit, not Is est derlsui. Piledrus. 

— " A dastard who brags of his prowess, and is devoid of 

courage, imposes on strangers, but is the jest of those 

who know him." 
Virt litis fort -una comes. — "Fortune is the companion of 

virtue." Motto of Lords Newhaven and Harberton. 
Virtutis laus omtiis in actione consistit. ClO. — " All the 

merit of virtue depends upon the activity with which it i» 

exercised." See Paulum sepultce, &c. 
Virtutis uberrtmum alimentum 

Est honos, 

— " Honour is the chief support of virtue." 
Virtutisque viam desPrit arduae. Hor. — " And he deserts 

the arduous path of virtue." 
Virtutum omnium fundamentum pietas.—" Piety is the found- 
ation of all the virtues." 
Virtutum primam esse puta compescere linguam ; 

Proximus ille Deo est qui scit ratione tacere. Cato. 

— " Think it the first of virtues to restrain the tongue ; 

he approaches nearest to a god who knows when it is 

best to be silent." 
Virum bonum nee pretio, nee gratia, nee perlculo a via recti 

dediici oportet. Ad Herenn. — " A good man ought not 

to be drawn from the path of rectitude by wealth, by 

favour, or by danger." 
Virum imprdbum vel mm mordeat. Prov. — " A mouse even 

may bite the wicked man." Said of those who are pa- 
ralyzed by a bad conscience. 
Vis comica. — " Comic power," or "talent." 
Vis conslli expers mole ruit sua ; 

Vim temperdtam Di quoque provehunt 

In majus ; idem odere vires 

Omne nefas ammo moventes. Hor. 

— " Force, without judgment, falls by its own weight ; 

moreover, the gods promote well-regulated force to further 

advantage: but they detest force that meditates every 

crime." 
Vis inertice. — " The power of inertness." The tendency of 

every bodv to remain at rest, and consequently to resist 
ItH  

motion. Csed figuratively for indolence or moutal inert- 
ness. 

Vis recte vivPre ? Quis non ? 
Si virtus hoc una potest dare ; fortis omissis 
Hoc age dellciis. Hob. 

— " Would you live happily ? Who would not ? If 
virtue alone can confer this, discard pleasures, and strenu- 
ously pursue it." 

Vis unit a fortior. — "Power is • strengthened by union." 
Motto of the Earl of Mountcashel. 

Viscus merus vestra est blandUia. Plaut. — " Tour coaxing 
is so much bird-lime." 

Hsu carentem magna pars vert latet. Sen. — " A great part 
of the truth lies concealed from him who wants discern- 
ment." 

1'isiim visu. — " To see and be seen," or " Face to face." 
Whence most probably the French word vis-a-vis. 

Vitd 

Cedat, uti convlva satur. Hor. 

— " Let him withdraw from life, like a guest well filled." 
See Cur non, &c. 

Vita enim mortuorum in memorid vivarum est posita. ClC. — 
" The life of the dead is retained in the memory of the 
living." 

Vita hdniinis sine tttfris mors est. — " The life of a man with- 
out letters is death." 

Vita lauddbilis boni viri, honesta ergo quoniam lauddbtlis. 
ClC. — "The life of the good man is praiseworthy, and 
being praiseworthy must be honourable." 

Vitdpatris. — " In his father's lifetime." Often written v. p. 

Vita turpis ne morti quidem honestce locum relinquit. ClC. — 
" A life of shame leaves no room even for an honourable 
death." See Qualis vita, &c. 

Vita; est avidus, quisquis non vult 
Mundo secum pereunte mori. Sen. 
— " He is greedy of life who is unwilling to die when the 
world is perishing around him." 

— - Vitce 

Perclpit liumanos odium, lucisque videndae, 

Vt MM consciscant moerenti pectore lethum. Luceet. 

— " Hatred of life, and of beholding the light, seizes upon 

men, to make them with sorrowing breast inflict death 

upon themselves." 

Vitce post-scenia celant. Lvcbet. — " They conceal the 

secret actions of their lives." The Post-scenium was the 

part of the theatre behind the scenes, containing the 

robing-room ; hence it is here used in the plural, to signify 

secret actions hidden from the eyes of the world. 
Vitce signum pulsus est. Med. Aphor. — " The pulse is the 

sign of life." 
Vitce summa brevis spent nos vetat inchodre longam. Hon. — 

" The short span of life forbids us to encourage pro- 
longed hope." 
Vitce via virtus. — " Virtue is the way of life." Motto of the 

Earl of Portarlington. 
Vitam impendere vero. Juv. — "To lay down one's life 

for the truth." See llle igituf, &c. 
Vitam regit fortuna, non sapientic Cic. — " Fortune governs 

this life, and not wisdom." 
Vitandu est improba Siren 

DesMia. ■ Hon. 

— " Sloth, that seductive Syren, is to be shunned." 
Vitdret caelum Phaeton, si v'weret ; et quos 

Optdrat stiilte, tangere nollet equos. Ovid. 

— " If Phaeton were living he would shun the skies, ana 

would be loth to touch the horses for which, in his folly, 

he wished." 
Vitdvi deiiique culpam, 

Non laudem mPrui. Hob. 

— " I have avoided error, not merited praise." 
Vitia honiinum atque fraudes damnis, ignonxiniis, vineftlis, 

verberibus, exiliis, morte mulctantur. Cic. — " The vices 

and frauds of men are punished with fines, ignominy, 

chains, stripes, exile, and death." 
Vitia nobis sub virtutum nomine obrepunt. Sen. — " Vices 

creep upon us, under the name of virtues." Thus, avarice 

will palm itself off under the name of economy. 
Vitia otii negotio discutienda sunt. Sen. — " The evils of sloth 

are only to be shaken off by attending to business." 
Vitiant artus cegrce contdgia mentis. Ovid. — " The diseases 

of the mind contagiously impair the bodily powers." 



SO-2 VIT— VIV. 

I'itiis nemo sine nascltur ; opttmus ille 
Qui minimis urgi'tur. Hob. 

— " No man is born without faults ; he is the best who is 
burthened with fewest." 

Vitiis suis pervidendis caucus est homo, in aJiPnis persplcax. 
— "Man is blind to his own faults, but quick at per* 
ceiving those of others." He readily sees "the mote in 
his brother's eye." 

Vitium capiunt ni moveantur aqua. — " Water becomes putrid 
if kept stagnant." 

Vitium commune omnium est, 

Quod nimium ad rem in senectd attenti sumus. Tku. 
— " It is a fault common to us all, that in old age we In- 
come too attached to worldly interests." 

Vitium exemplo princ/pis inolescit. — " Vice, through the ex- 
ample of the prince, becomes fashionable." 

Vitium Juit, nunc mos est, assentdtio. Syk. — "Flattery, 
which was formerly a vice, is now a fashion." 

Vivd voce. — " By the living voice." By oral testimony. 

Vivat ; et absentem, quoniam sic fata tulrrunt, 

Pivot, et auxilio sublhset usque suo. Ovid. 

— " May he live on ; and since the Fates have thus de- 
creed, may he live ever to relieve me, far, far away, by his 
aid." 

Vivat rex. — " Long live the king." Vivat reglna. — " Long 
live the queen." Vivant rex et reg'ina. — " Long live the 
king and queen." 

Vive memor lethi. Pebs. — " Live mindful of death." 

Vive sine invtdid, mollesque inglorius annos 

Exlge ; amicltias et tibi junge pares. Ovid. 

— " Live without envy ; pass in obscurity thy tranquil 

years, and in friendship attach thy equals to thyself." 

Vive valPque. — " Live and fare well." " Health and happi- 
ness." 

Vivendi recte qui prorogat horam 

Rustlcus expectat dum dejiuat amnis. Hob. 

— " He who postpones the hour of living well, is like the 
peasant who waits until the river shall cease to flow." 
See JRusticus expectat, &c. 

Vivendum est igltur, ut ed HberdTitate utdmur, qua? prosit anU 
cis, noceat nemlni. Cic. — "We must make it our care 
then to exercise such liberality as may benefit our friends 
and injure no one." 

Vivendum est recte, cum propter plurlma, time his 
Prceclpue causis, ut linguas mancipiorum 
Contemnas : nam lingua mali pars pesslma servi. Juv. 
— " You should lead a correct life for many reasons, but 
especially for this, that you may defy the tongues of your 
domestics ; for the tongue is the worst part of a bad 
servant." 

VivPre sat, vincere. — " To conquer is to live enough." Motto 
of the Earl of Sefton. 

Vivh'e si recte nescis, dPcede perltis. Hor. — " If you know 
not how to live aright, make way for those who do." 
" Learn to live well, or fairly make your will." Pope. 

Vlvlda vis (Iritmi. Lucret. — "The strong force of tin- 
mind." The active powers of the understanding. 

Vivlmus aliend Jiducid. Pliny the Elder. — " We live by 
trusting one another." 

Vivlmus inposteris. — " We live in our posterity." See Vita 
enim, &c. 

Vivlt adhuc, vitamque tibi debere fatetur. Ovid. — " He live* 
still, and acknowledges that he owes his life to you." 

Vlvit post funera virtus. — "Virtue survives the grave." 
Motto of the Irish Earl of Shannon. 

Vlvite fetices, quibus est fortuna peracta 

Jam sua ! ViRG. 

— " Live happily, ye whose destinies are already ful- 
filled!" Struggling onward, I can behold those without 
envy who have successfully terminated their labours. 

Vlvite fortes, 

Fortiaque adversis oppbmte pectora rebus. Hor. 

— " Live as brave men, and bravely breast adversity." 

Vlvltur exiguo mPlius : natvra bedtis 

Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognfwPrit uti. Claud. 

— " Men live best upon a little : nature has granted to all 

to be happy, if they did but know how to use her gifts." 

Vlvltur parvo bene, cui paternum 
Splendet in mensd tPnui sallnum ; 
Nee leves somnos timor aut eupldo 

Sordldus aufert. Hor. 



504 V IV— VIX. 

— " He lives happily on a little whose paternal salt-cellar 
shines on his frugal board ; nor does fear or sordid covet- 
ousness disturb his quiet repose." 
Vivo et regno, simul ista reliqui, 
Qwe vos ad caelum fertis rumore secundo. Hob. 
— " I live and am a king, as soon as I have quitted those 
scenes which you extol to the skies in such high terms." 

Ttvunt ii qui ex corporum vinciilis, tanquam e carcPre, mnlS» 
runt. CiO. — " Those live who have escaped from the fet- 
ters of the body, as though from a prison." Who are not 
chained down by fleshly lusts. 

Vivunt in VenPrem frondes, etiam nemus omne per altum 
Felix arbor amat ; nutant ad tnutua palma 
FoedPra, populeo suspirat populus ictu, 
Et pldtani pldtanis, alnoque ass'ibtlat alnus. Claud. 

— " The leaves live but to love, and, throughout the whole 
lofty grove the happy trees indulge their loves ; palm, as 
it nods to palm, confirms their ties; the poplar sighs for 
the poplar's embrace; plane whispers to plane, alder to 
alder." Ancient intimation of the Sexual System of 
Linnaeus. 

Vix a te videor posse tenrre manutt. Ovid. — "I hardly seem 
to be able to keep my hands oft' you." 

Vix dPctmus quisque est, qui ipsus sese novPrit. Plaut. 

— "There is hardly one man in ten who knows himself." 

Vix duo tresve mihi de tot siiperestis, atnlci. 

Ccetera Fortunes, non mea turba,fuit. Ovid. 
— " Out of so many friends, scarcely two or three of you 
are now left to me. The rest of the crowd belonged to 
Fortune, not to me." 

Vix ea nostra voco. Ovid. — " I scarcely call these things 
our own." Motto of Lord Sundridge and the Earl oi 
Warwick. 

Vix equidem credo, sed et insultdre jacenti 

Te mihi, nee verbis parcrre, Jama refert. Ovid. 

— " For my part I hardly believe it, but rumour says that 

you insult me now prostrate, and are not sparing of your 

reproaches." 

Vix mihi credetis, sed credtte, Troja maneret, 
Fraceptis Prirlmi siforet usa sui. Ovid. 

— " You will hardly believe me, yet may believe me ; 



VIX— VOL. 505 

Troy would have been still standing if she had followed 

the advice of her Priam." 
Yix tamen erlpiam, posJto pavone, velis quin 

Hoc potius, quam gallind tergere palatum, 

Sara avis, et pictd pandat spectdciila caudd. Hor. 

— " Were a peacock placed on table, I should scarcely be 

able to prevail on you not to eat of it instead of a pullet, 

merely because it is a rare bird and makes a show with its 

gaudy tail." 
Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona 

Multi ; sed omnes illacrymdbiles 

Urgentur, ignotique longd 

Node, carent quia vate sacro. Hoe. 

— " Many brave men lived before Agamemnon ; but all of 

them, unlamented and unknown, are whelmed in endless 

night, having found no sacred bard." 
Vocat in certdmlna Divos. Virg. — " He calls the gods 

to arms." 
■Volat ambiguis 



MobUis alis hor a, nee ulli 

Pr&stat velox Fortunafidem. Sen. 

— " The fleeting hour speeds on with doubtful wing, nor 

does hastening fortune keep faith with any one." 
Volenti non fit injuria. Law Max. — " No injury is done to 

a consenting party." This applies only to those who are 

by law considered responsible for their actions. 

Volitdre per ora virum. Virg. — " To hover on the lips 

of men." See Tentanda, &c. 
Yolo, non vdleo. — " I am willing but unable." Motto of the 

Earl of Carlisle. 
Voluntas non potest cogi. — " The will cannot be forced." 
" He that complies against his will, 
Is of the same opinion still." — Hudibras II. 3. 547. 
Voluptas est malorum esca : quod ed non minus homines 

Quam hamo capiuntur pisces. Plaut. 

— " Pleasure is the bait of misfortune ; for by it men are 

caught just as fishes are by the hook." 
Voluptdtes commendat rdrior usus. Juv. — " Pleasures 

sparingly enjoyed have a higher relish." 
Voluptdti mceror sequitur. — " Sorrow follows indulgence." 
Yoluptdti obsequens. Ter. — " Devoted to pleasure." 



50G VOL— VUL. 

/ 'oluptdtibiu se constringendum dare. — " To resign himself to 

the enthralment of pleasure." 
Vos, procul ! O procul ! este proftini ! Vino. — See Pro- 
cul, &c. 
Vos sdpfre et solos aio bene vivPre, quorum 

Conspicitur nitidis funddta peciinia villi*. Hob. 

— " 1 say that you alone are wise and live well, wboM 

wealth is conspicuous in the elegance of \<nir villas." 
Vos vahte .'— " Fare ye well ! " 

Vos vaUte et plaudite. Ter. — " Farewell, and give your ap- 
plause." This expression, or the words Plausum date, 

" Grant applause," was used at the conclusion of the 

Latin Comedies. 
Vota vita mea. — " My life is devoted." Motto of the Earl 

of Westmeath. 
Vox audita peril, UtPra scripta manet. — " The word that is 

heard passes away, the letter that is written remains." 

See Litera scripta, Ac. 
Vox clamant is in deserto. — " The voice of one crying in the 

wilderness." See John i. 23. 
Vox erat in cursu, cum me mea prbdidit umbra. Ovid. — 

" She was in the middle of her speech, when my shadow 

betrayed me." 
Vox erat in cursu; vultum dubitantis habebam. Ovid. — 

" She was in the middle of her speech ; I had the look of 

one in doubt " 
Vox et prcethrea nihil. — " A voice and nothing more." A 

mere sound ; fine words without meaning. Said originally 

of the nightingale. From the Greek. 
Vox faucibus hcesit. Vibg. — " His voice cleaved to his 

throat " He was dumb through amazement and dread. 
Vox popilli vox Dei. — " The voice of the people is the voice 

of God." A maxim of the opponents of the Jus divinum 

of kings. The origin of it is not known, but it is quoted 

as a proverb by William of Malmesbury, who lived in the 

early part of the twelfth century. 
Vox stellar um. — "The voice of the stars." A favourite title 

with the old Almanacs. 
Vulqdre amid nomen, sed rara est fides. Phjed. — " The title 

of friend is common, but fidelity is rare." 
Vulgato corpore mulier. Livy. — "An abandoned woman." 



VTTL— ZON. 507 

■ - Vulgo audio 

Diet, diem adimh'C (pgritudmem homtnibus. Ter. 

— " I hear it often said that time assuages human sorrow." 
Vulgus amicltias utilitdte probat. Ovid. — " The multitude 

estimate friends by the advantages to be derived from 

them." 
Vulgus consuetiidinem pro lege habet. — " It is a common 

error to consider usage as law." 
Vulgus ex verttdte pauca, ex opinione nxulta, cesflmat. Cic. — 

" The populace judge of few things on truthful grounds, 

of many from prejudice." 
Vulnera nisi sint tacta tractdtaque sandri non possunt. Liv. 

— " Unless wounds are handled and dressed they cannot 

be healed." 
Vulnus alit venis, et cceco carpltur igni. Vieg. — " She nour- 
ishes the poison in her veins, and is consumed by a secret 

flame." Said of Dido's secret passion for ^Eneas. 
Vultus ariimi janua et tabula. Cic. — " The countenance is 

the very portal and portrait of the mind." So Ecclus. xix. 

29, " A man is known by the eye, and the face discovers 

wisdom." 
Vultus est index ammi. Prov. — "The countenance is the 

index of the mind." The opinion of Lavater and the 

physiognomists. 



Z. 

Zonam perdddit . ILor. — " He has lost his purse." He IB m 
desperate or distressed circumstances. 



APPENDIX 



A divittbus omnia magnifier, fiunt. — " Everything is done 
magnificently by the rich." 

A soli* ortu tuque ad ocedsum. — " From sunrise to sunset." 

Ab intipid ad virtutem obsepta est via. Ter. — "The road 
to virtue is obstructed by poverty." See Res anguxht. Ac. 

Abi in malam rem. — " Be off, and ill may it fare with you." 
" Go to the deuce." 

Abiit, excessit, evdsit, erupit. Cic. — " lie has departed, fled, 
escaped, disappeared." Cicero's description of the ab- 
rupt flight of the guilt-stricken Catiline. 

Absit invtdia. — " All offence apart." 

Absit omen. — " May it not prove ominous." 

Actis avoum implet, non srgnlbus annis. — " He fills up life 
with deeds, not with long years of indolence." An 
adaptation from the Elegy to Livia Augusta, generally 
attributed to Pedo Albinovanus. 

Ad amussim. — " According to line and rule." Exactly. 

Ad nauseam. — " So as even to create disgust." 

Ad oslentdtionem opum. — "To show off his wealth." 

Ad rem. — " To the purpose." 

Adrnonere volulmus, non mordiire ; prodesse, non l&dfre ; con- 
sulere tnorbis komtnum, non ojfictre. Eras. — " Our object 
is, to admonish, not to carp ; to improve, not to wound ; 
to think of remedies for the diseases of mankind, not to 
obstruct their cure." 

JEgritiido ariimi, sine ulld rerum expectations meliore. — " De- 
spondency unmitigated by the prospect of better fortune." 

Agunt, non cogunt. — "They lead, not drive." 

Ah ! quam dulce est meminisse ! — " Ah ! how great are the 
delights of memory!" 

Alii taurinis follibus auras 
Accipiunt redduntque. Vino. 



ALI— AST. 500 

— " Others draw in and eject the air from bellows made of 

bulls' hide." The Cyclops working their bellows. 
Acquis in omnibus, nullus in singulis. Scal. — " Somebody in 

all, nobody in each." Jack of all trades, master of none ! 
Alter alterius auxilio eget. Sall. — " One requires the aid 

of the other." 
Alter ego. — "A second self." A bosom friend. 
Amlci qui diu abfuerunt, in mutuos ruunt amplexus. — "Friends 

who have been long separated rush into each other's 

embraces." 
Amor laudis et patriae pro stipendio est. — " Love of praise 

and of our country are their own reward." In the con- 
sciousness of having acted rightly. 
Ambre nihil mollius, nihil violentius. — " Nothing is more 

tender, nothing more violent, than love." 
An ideo tantum veneras ut exires ? Maet. — " Did you then 

come only to go away again ? " See Cur in, &c. 
Anathema maran-dtha. — "May he be cursed, and may the 

Lord at his coming take vengeance on him." See 1 Cor. 

xvi. 22. The first word is Greek, the second Syriac. 
Angustd utitur fortilnd. Cic. — " He is in narrow circum- 
stances." His means are small. 
Angusta via est quae ducit ad vitam. — " Narrow is the way 

which leadeth to life." Matt. vii. 14. 
Animal implume bipes. — "A two-legged animal without 

feathers." Said to have been Plato's definition of man. 
Animus non deficit cequus. — " A well-regulated mind is not 

wanting." Motto of Lord Gwydyr, taken from Horace, 

Ep. 1. 12. 30. 
Annus inceptus habetur pro complPto. Law Max. — " A year 

entered on is reckoned as completed." 
Aqua pumpdginis. — A cant expression with medical men 

for " spring water." The second word, we need hardly 

say, is dog Latin. 
Aquce guttce saxa excavant. — " Dropping water hollows out 

rocks." See Stillicidi casus, &c. 
Arcades ambo. Virg. — " Both Arcadians," — used ironically 

to signify " a pair well-matched " or " Birds of a feather." 

See Par nobile fratrum. 
Astra castra, numen lumen. — " The stars are my camp, the 



510 AST— (LET. 

Deity ray light." A verbal quibb.e, the motto of the Earl 

of Balcarras. 
Astrictus necessitate. Cic. — " Compelled by necessity " 
At spes nonfraeta. — " But my hope is not broken." Motto 

of the Earl of Hopetoun. 
Aurea mediocfitas. — "The golden mean" between gnat 

\\ calth and poverty. See Auream quisquis, &c. 
Auspicium melifris ceci. — "A presage of better times." 

Motto of the Duke of St. Allan's. 
Aut cinctre aut mori. — "To conquer or to die." Motto of 

the late Duke of Kent. 
An numerantur avorum. Viro. — "I boast of a long train 

of ancestors." Motto of Lord Grantley. See Genus int- 

mortale, Ac. 
ArUo viret honore. — " He flourishes with ancestral honours." 

Motto of the Earl of Bute. 



B. 

Basis virtutum constantia. — " Steadiness is the basis of all 
the virtues." Motto of the Viscount Hereford. 

Bellum internec'tnum. — "A war of extermination." 

Bene nati, bene vestiti, et mediocriter docti. — "Well born, 
well clothed, and moderately learned." The qualifications 
required of a Fellow, by the statutes of All Souls College, 
Oxford. 

Bonum may is carendo quam fruendo cemltur. Prov. — " We 
appreciate more sensibly the good which we have not, than 
that which we have." 



Caco'ethes loquendi. — " An itch for SDeaking." 

Caelia ridens 

Est Venus, incfdens Juno, Minerva loquens. 
— " Caelia laughing, is beauteous as Venus ; walking, ma- 
jestic as Juno; speaking, wise as Minerva." 

Cceteris paribus. — " Other things being equal." Being eqnal 
in other respects. 

 

Casta morihus et Integra pudore. Maet. — " Of chaste morals 
and irreproachable modesty." 

Cave ab homme uriius libri. — " Beware of the man of one 
book." He is the most likely to have mastered it 
thoroughly. See Homo unius, &c. 

Cedat amor rebus, res age, tutus eris. Ovid. — " Let love 
give way to business, attend to business and you will bo 
safe." See Quijlnem, &c. 

Clambrem ad sldPra mittunt. Statius. — " They send their 
shouts to the stars." The welkin rings with their cries. 

Coelitiis mihi vires. — " My strength is from heaven." Motto 
of Viscount Ranelagh. 

Commune quodcumque est lucri. Pii^d. — " A windfall is 
common property." The law of the road, that when twc 
persons make a lucky "find" they go halves. 

Compendia, dispendia. Prov. — " A short cut is a losing cut.' ; 
" The longest way about is the shortest way home." 

Conando Grceci Trojd potlti sunt. — " By trying, the Greeks 
became masters of Troy." A translation from Theocritus. 
See 'Ec Tpoiav, &c. 

Consents libidinum. ClC. — " A partner in his debaucheries." 

Consequitur quodcunque petit. — " He attains whatever he 
aims at." Motto of the Marquis of Headfort. 

Consilium ne sperne meum, tibi fausta parantur. — " Despise 
not my advice, auspicious days await you'." 

Consuettldo malorum bonos mores conlamlnat. — " The com- 
panionship of the wicked corrupts good morals." See 
0>8tipoviyiv, &c. 

Contempsi' glddium Catillna?, non pertimescam tuos. ClC. — 
" I have despised the sword of Catiline, I shall not dread 
yours." 

Contractu ta jure, contrario jure pereunt. Law. Max. — "Pri- 
vileges established by one law are abrogated by the pro- 
visions of an opposite law." 

Cooperante diabolo. — ""With the assistance of the devil." 

Copia verborum. — " A copious stock of words." 

Cor et mentem colore nltlmur. — " We endeavour to improve 
the heart and the mind." Motto over the entrance of a 
school at Marquise, between Calais and Boulogne. 

Oor unum, via una. — " One heart, one way." Motto of the 
Marouis of Exeter 



512 ORU— DOM. 

Cruel dum splro fido. — " While I breathe I put my trust in 
the cross." Motto of Viscount Galway. 

Cu jus gloria neque profuit quisquam laudando ; nee vifupe- 
rando quisquam nocult. — "Whose glory no praises could 
enhance, no censure injure." 

Cum permlssu superlbrum. — " With permission of the supe- 
rior authorities." 

Cur omnium Jit culpa paucorum scelus ? — " Why should the 
wickedness of a few be deemed the guilt of all ?" 

Curldsa fellcitas. Petb. Abb. — "Studied happiness," or art- 
Jul artlessness of style. 

D. 

De bonis non. Law Term. — " Of goods not (administered)," 
administratis being understood. Where all the personalty 
of an intestate has not been administered to, and a new 
administrator is appointed, he is technically known as an 
"administrator de bonis non." 

Decori decus addlt avito. — " He adds new lustre to the 
honours of his forefathers." Motto of the Scotch Earl 
of Kellie. 

Dejecta arbdre qui vis ligna coltiglt. Prov. — "When the tree is 
down, every one gathers wood." See Apvoc ntaovene, &c. 

Deo adjuvante, non tlmendum. — "God assisting, there is no- 
thing to be feared." Motto of Earl Fitzwilliam. 

Detur dignlorl. — " Let it be given to the most worthy." 

Deus ex machind. Prov. — "A god from the clouds." An 
expression implying unexpected aid in an emergency. In 
allusion to the mode in which, in the Greek and Bcznffi 
theatres, the divinities were launched on the stage by the 
aid of mechanism. See Nee Deus, &c, and Qtog Ik p.rjxavrj<;. 

Disjecta membra. — " The scattered limbs." See Dlsjecti 
membra poetce. 

Disputandl pruritus eccleslnrum scabies. — " The itchof disputa 
tion will prove the scab of the church." A favourite saying 
of Sir Henry Wotton, inscribed on his tomb at Eton. 

Doniine, dirlge nos. — " O Lord ! direct us." The motto of the 
city of London. 

Domini pudet, non servltiitls. Sen. — " I am ashamed of my 
master, no; of my servitude." 



Domlnus providehit. — " The Lord will provide." Motto of 

the Earl of Glasgow. See Gen. xxii. 8. 
Dotiita uxores tnactant inalo et damno vivos. Plaut. — 

" Well-dowered wives involve their husbands in misfortune 

and ruin." 
Ducit amor patrice. — " The love of my country leads me on." 

Motto of Baron Milford. 
Dulce sodalitium. Mabt. — " A happy association." A 

sweet society. 

E. 

E fungis nati homines. — " Men sprung from mushrooms.'* 
Upstarts. 

Erlmus, Jvrtasse, quando illi non erunt. — "We shall perhaps 
survive, after they have ceased to exist." 

Et decus et pretium recti. — "At once the ornament and the 
reward of virtue." Motto of the Duke of Grafton. 

Et nos quoque tela sparslmus. — " We too have flung our 
darts." Motto of Earl Moira. 

Ex alimo tergore lata secantur lora. Prov. — " Broad thongs 
are cut from another man's leather." 

Ex sese. Cic. — " From himself." He has risen by his own 
industry. 

Excessit mediclna malum. — " The remedy has done more 
than the disease." 

Excessus in jure reprobcitur. Law Max. — " Excess is con- 
demned in the law." See Jus summum, &c. 

Eximius prcestanti corpore taicrus. Viro. — " A bull ex- 
celling in beauty." 

Exltus acta probat. — " The result proves the deed." " All \ 
well that ends well." 

Expectans expect dvi. — " I waited patiently." The beginning 
of the fortieth Psalm. 

Experientia stultorum magistra. Prov. — " Experience is the 
teacher of fools." They can only be taught by suffering. 

E. 

Facile consdia damus Slits. — " We easily bestow advice on 
others." 

? i 



le primus. — "By far the first." 

Fax mentis incendinm yloriee. — " The flame of glory is the 
torch of the mind." Motto of the Earl of Granard. 

Fidei commissum. Law Term. — " Entrusted to faith." In 
the Komau law a species of test lmentary dispirit ion, in 
reliance on the good faith of the heir. 

Fides carbondria. — "The coal-heaver's faith," or "belit t." 
A comparatively modern expression, said to have originated 
in the following circumstance : A coal-porter, being asked 
what he believed, made answer, " What the Church be- 
lieves;" and on being asked what the Church believed, 
replied, " What I believe." According to some of the 
French authorities, it means, " A simple, blind, unreason- 
ing faith." 

Fidus Achates. Viro. — " The faithful Achates." A character 
in the ^Ineid, somewhat indistinctly drawn, but always at 
the side of ^Eneas in his numerous perils and misfortunes. 
Hence a faithful friend is sometimes called a Fidus Achates, 
but the phrase is more commonly used in an ironical 
sense. 

Fidus et audax. — "Faithful and intrepid." Motto of the 
Earl of Lismore. 

Finis ecce laborum ! — " Behold the end of my toils !" 

Fleet i, non frangi. — " To bend, not to break." Motto of 
Viscount Palmerston. 

Flumlna rapide subsldunt. — " Swollen rivers subside ra- 
pidly." 

Forte scutum solus ducum. — " A strong shield is the safety of 
leaders." Motto of Earl Fortescue. 

Fortis sub forte fatiscet. — " Even a brave man will succumb 
to fortune." Motto of the Earl of Upper Ossory. 

Fortlter, Jidetiter, feliciter. — " Boldly, faithfully, success- 
fully." Motto of Viscount Monk and Lord Hutchinson. 

Fortuna multis parcltre in paenam solet. Labes. — " Fortune 
spares many only to punish them." 

Fortuna sua e cujusque fingitur moribus. — " Every man'a 
fortune is shaped by his own conduct." 

Fratres ddiqite, et matris consilia ne aspernamlni. — " Love 
your brethren, and despise not your mother's counsel." 

Fraus latet in generdltbus. Law Max. — " In generalities 
fraud lies concealed." 



FEE— ILL 515 

Fremunt immdni turbine venti. Ovid. — " The winds 
rage in a tremendous storm." 

Frons domtni plus prodest quam occipttium. — " The forehead 
of the master is more useful than his hindhead." A proverb 
quoted by Cato and Pliny the Elder. The eye and thought 
of the master are necessary to the success of his business. 

Fures clamorem. Proa. — " Thieves raising the hue and cry," 
that they have been robbed. See Clodius accusat, &c. 



G. 

Gaudet tentdmlne virtus. Luc. — " Virtue rejoices in tempt- 
ation." Motto of the Earl of Dartmouth. 

Quia plures occldit quam glddius, estque fomes omnium ma- 
lorum. Fe. Patbicius, Bishop of Gaeta. — " The gullet 
kills more than the sword, and is the fuel that kindles all 
evils." 

H. 

Habet Beus suas horas et moras. — " God has his hours and 
his delays." 

Histories decus est, et quasi anlma, ut cum eventis causes copu- 
lentur. Bacon de Aug. Scien. — " It is the beauty and, 
as it were, the soul, of history, that events are duly con- 
nected with their causes." 

Hoc genus omne. Hor. — "All that class of men." 

Generally used in a contemptuous sense. 

Honor est a Nilo. — " Honour is from the Nile." Br. Bur- 
ney's celebrated anagram upon the name of Horatio Nelson. 

Hostes magis assidui quam graves. — " Enemies rather assidu- 
ous than powerful." 

Hostis honori invidia. — " An enemy's envy is an honour." 
Motto of the Earl of Harborough. 



I. 

Itias maldrum. Cic. — " A whole Iliad of woes." See 'IXiac 
rat n 

% I 2 



Imminente lund. Hob. — " By the light of the moon." 

Imperio regit unus cequo. Hoe. — " He alone rules all with 
justice. Motto of Sir Robert Gunning. 

In articulo mortis. — " At the point of death." 

In ferrutn pro libertdte ruebant. — " For liberty they rushed 
upon the sword." Motto of the Earl of Leicester. 

In hoc signo spes mea. — " In this sign is my hope." Motto 
of Viscount Taaffe. 

In me consumpsit vires fortuna nocendo. — " Fortune has ex- 
hausted on me her power in the injury which she has 
done me." 

In pretio pretium nunc est ; dat census honor es, 

Census amicitias ; pauper ublque jacet. Ovid. 

— "Money now is the only tiling prized ; wealth alone 
gives honours, wealth gives friendships ; the poor man is 
everywhere despised." 

In statu pupilldri. — " In the condition of a pupil." All 
students at the University, under the degree of Master of 
Arts, are in statu pupillari. 

Incultum ac derelictum solum. — " An uncultivated and neg- 
lected soil." 

Indignante invidid jforebit Justus. — " In spite of envy the just 
man will nourish." Motto of the Earl of Glendore. 

Inepta patris lenltas, et facilitas prava. — " The foolish lenity 
and mischievous indulgence of a father." 

Ingenia gravia et solemnia, ac mutdri nescia, plus plerumque 
habent dignitatis quam felicitdtis. Bacox de Augmen. 
Scien. — u Men whose minds are stern, solemn, and inflex- 
ible enjoy, in general, more dignity than happiness." 

Ingentes virtutes ingentia vitia. Livr. — " Great virtues often 
lead to great vices." 

Ingrdtus est, qui beneficium se accepisse negat quod acct'pit ; 
ingrdtus, qui dissimulat ; ingrdtus, qtd non reddit ; ingrd- 
tissimus omnium, qui oblltus est. Cic. — " He is ungrate- 
ful who denies that he has received a kindness when he 
has received it ; ungrateful who conceals the fact that he 
has received it ; ungrateful who does not return it ; but 
the most ungrateful of all is he who forgets it." 

Ingue brevi spatio mutantur scscla animantum, 

- . quasi cursbres vitai *ampdda tradunt. Lucret. 
" And in a short space of time the tribes of livuig creatures are changed (by successive generations), and, like 
the racers, deliver the torch of life (from hand to hand)." 
In allusion to the torch-race at the festival of Vulcan at 
Athens, when the runners handed a lighted torch from 
one to another, and he who carried the torch lighted to 
the end of the course was proclaimed victor. See Aa/*- 
7ra'^ia, &C. 

Jnsitd homiritbus lib/dme alendi de industrid rumores. — " The 
natural propensity of mankind to propagate reports with 
eagerness." 

Instar omnium. — "Equal to all the others." Plato est mihi 
instar omnium. Cic. 

Intamindtis honorlbus. Hob. — " With unspotted honours." 
Motto of Lord St. Helens. 

Invltum sequitur honos. — " Honour follows him even against 
his will." Motto of the Marquis of Donegal. 

Iram qui vincit, hostem supPrat maximum. — " He who con- 
trols his anger subdues his greatest enemy." 


J. 

Jacta est alea. — " The die is cast." The words of Caesar on 
passing the Rubicon. 

Jejunus venter non audit verba libenter. — " A hungry belly 
has no ears." A mediaeval Leonine proverb. 

Judicata res pro veritdfe acclpltur. Law Max. — " An award 
that has been made is received as a just precedent." 

Jus omnium in omnia, et consequenter bellum omnium in 
omnes. — " Where all men have a right to all things, the 
consequence is war of all men with all men." The na- 
tural state of man, as described by Hobbes. 

Justum ab injustis petPre insipientia est. Plaitt. — " It is 
folly to expect justice at the hands of the unjust." 



K. 

Kudos.— 11 Praise," "glory," or "fame." Prom the Greek 
kvIoc, which has almost become a dictionary word in tlio 
English languags. 







L. 



Labor ipse voluptas. — ' Even labour itself is a pleasure." 
Motto of Lord King. 

Labordre ett ordre. Prov. — " To labour is to pray." To the 
same effect aa the proverb that says, " The gods help those 
who help themselves." See Qui laborat, &c. (App.) 

Lackrymd nil citius arescit. Cic. — " Nothing dries up sooner 
than a tear." 

Lateat scintillula forsan. — " Perchance a small spark may 
lie concealed." The motto of the Royal Humane So- 
ciety. 

Latrantes ride ; te tuafama manet. — " Laugh at cynics ; your 
well-earned fame awaits you." 

Lent us in dicendo, et pene frigidus orator. Cic. — " An orator 
tedious in delivery and almost freezing." 

Leviusjxt patient id 

Quicquid corrig?re est nefas. IIou. 

— "Misfortunes which we cannot prevent are mitigated 
by resignation." " What can't be cured must be en- 
dured," says the old proverb. 

Libera me ab honiine rnalo, a meipso. St. Auoustik. — " De- 
liver me from the evil man, even from myself." 

Lingua, Tropus, Ratio, NumPrus, Tonus, Angulus, Astra, 
Rus, Nemus, Arma, Faber, Vulnera, Lana, Rates. 
— Literally, " Tongue, trope, reason, number, tone, angle, 
stars ; country, grove, arms, workman, wounds, wool, 
ships." In the first bine the ancients summed up the artes 
ingenu<B or liberates ; the ingenuous arts, which might be 
practised, according to their notions, without disgrace, by 
freemen : " Language, Rhetoric, Logic, Arithmetic, Music, 
Geometry, and Astronomy." In the latter line were in- 
cluded the mechanical arts, practised only by slaves : 
" Agriculture, propagation of Trees, manufacture of Arms, 
Carpenter's work, Medicine, Weaving, and Ship-building." 

Lucernam olet. Prov. — " It smells of the lamp." It is a 
studied composition. 

Lusus ariimo debent aliquando dari, 

Ad cogitandum melior ut redeat sibi. Ph-EDBTTS. 

— "The mind ought occasionally to be indulged with re- 


taxation, that it may, with increased vigour, return to 
study." 

M. 

Malitia supplet eetdtem. Law Max.- -" Malice supplies the 
want of age." Children at a certain age are to hear the 
punishment of their actions if malice prepense can be 
shown. 

Malo mori quant foeddri. — " I had rather die than be dis- 
graced." The motto of the Earl of Athlone. 

Malum est tnulier, sed necessdrlum malum. — " Woman is an 
evil, but a necessary evil." 

Manifesta phrenesis, 

Ut locuples moridris, egenti vlvPrefato. Juv. 

— " It is evident madness to live in penury that you may 

die rich." 

Manus hcec inimlca tyrannis. — " This hand is hostile to ty- 
rants." Motto of the Earl of Carysfort. 

Maximum miraculum homo sapiens. — "A wise man is (now- 
a-days) the greatest of prodigies." 

Med 

Virtnte me involco. Hok. 

— " I wrap myself in my own virtue." As the philoso- 
pher in his cloak. 

Medicina, mortuorum sera est. Qutntil. — " Medicine is too 
late for the dead." 

Medlcm non dat quod pattern vult, sed quod ipse bonum scit. 
— " A physician does not prescribe what his patient 
wishes, but what he himself knows to be good." 

Melibrlbus auspiciis. — " Under more favourable auspices." 

• Melius fuerat non scribere, namque tacere 

Tutum semper erit. 

— " It had been better not to write, for silence is always 

safe." 

Mens sana in corpore sano. Juv. — " A sound mind in a 
sound body." 

Miles, Mercdtor, Stultus, Marltus, Amdtor. — " Soldier, Mer- 
chant, Fool, Husband, Lover." An ancient line, assigning 
a character to each finger, beginning with the thumb. It 
seems intended for an Hexameter, but has a false quantity. 



Militnvi non sine glorid. Hor. — "I too have fought, 
not without glory." He alludes to his skirmishes in the 
wars of love. See Militat omnia, &c. 

Multa bibens ac multa vorans. — "Drinking much aiul de- 
vouring much." 

Murus ahrneus cohscientia *ana.—"\ clear conscience ij ■ 
wall of brass." Motto of the Earl of Scarborough. 

Mature vel timi-re sperno. — "I leorn either to change or to 
fear." Motto of the Duke of Beaufort. 









N. 

Nee plflcldd contentus quitte est. — " Nor is he contented iu 

soft repose." Motto of the Earl of Peterborough, adapted 

from Virgil. 
Nee prece nee pretio. — 9 Neither by entreaty nor by bribe." 

Motto of Viscount Bateman. 
Nee quoerh-e nee spernere honorem. — "Neither to hunt after 

nor to despise honours." Motto of Viscount Jiolin^- 

broke. 
Nee reae nee popiilo sed utroque. — " Neither for king noi 

people, but for both." Motto of Lord Rolle. 
Nee temifre, nee timlde. — "Neither rashly nor timidly.'' 

Motto of the Earl of Darlington and Viscount Bulkeley. 
Nemo est tarn senex, qui se annum non putet posse vivtre. 

Cic. — "No man is so old that he does not think he may 

yet live a year." 
Nescio quid curtce semper abest rei. Hor. — " Something is 

ever wanting to render our fortunes complete." 
Nihil per sal turn. — " Nothing is done with a leap." A part 

of Bacon's maxim, Nihil facit nalura per solium. All the 

operations of nature are gradual. 
Nihil simile est idem. — " Nothing that is like is the same." 

Things that are similar are not identical. 
Nil molitur inepte. Hor. — "He attempts nothing inju- 
diciously." 

Nil nisi carmina desunt. Virg. — " Nothing is wanting 

but a song." 
Niniirum hie ego sum. Hor. — " Here I am." In this opin- 
ion, in this way of thinking, I take my stand. 

 

Nimium nee lauddre nee laedere. — " Neither to praise nor to 
censure too much." 

Nobilitdtis virtus, non stemma, character. — " Virtue, not pedi- 
gree, should characterize nobility." Motto of the Mar- 
quis of Westminster. 

Nomindtim. — " By name." 

Non animi curas demunt monies auri et superha atria. — 
" Neither heaps of gold nor superb halls can remove the 
cares of the mind." 

Non est disputandum. — " It is not to be disputed." There is 
no disputing. 

Non est usus ullius rei consociandus cum imprdbo. Ph.j:d. — 
" In all our dealings we should shun association with a 
dishonest man." 

Non est vendtor quivis per cornuaflator. — "Not every one is 
a huntsman that blows a horn." A mediaeval Leonine 
proverb. 

Non generant aquilas columbas. — " Eagles do not produce 
pigeons." Motto of the late Earl liodney, adapted from 
Horace. 

Non indfget calcdribus. — " He needs no spur." Said by De 
Foe of the Devil. From the remark of Isocrates concern- 
ing Ephorus, that he needed the spur in his compositions. 

Non mi aurum posco, nee mi pretium. — " I seek not gold, nor 
am I to be bought." 

Non numP.ro hcec judicantur sed pondPre. Cic. — "These 
things are not to be estimated by their number, but by 
their importance." 

Non plus aurum tibi quam monedfila? committebant. — Cic. 
— " They would no more trust gold to you than they would 
to a jackdaw." A proverbial expression in allusion to the 
thievish propensities of that bird. 

Non pros. Law Term. — A contraction of " non prosequitur." 
" He does not prosecute." A judgment entered against 
the plaintiff', in a suit where he does not appear to prose- 
cute, is so called. See Nolle prosequi. 

Non versiones sed eversiones. — " Not versions but eversions." 
Said by St. Jerome of the Latin Versions of the Scrip- 
tures used in his day. 

Nosce teipsum. — "Know thyself" See E coelo descendit, 
and TviJtdi atavrov. 
 

Nullius bom jucunda possessio sine socio. — "Of no blessing can 

the enjoyment be perfect, unless it be shared with ■ friend." 
Nullum quod tetlgit non orndvit. — "He attempted nothing 

that he did not embellish." From Dr. Johnson's epitaph 

on Goldsmith. 
Nullum tarn impudent menddeinm est ut teste cdreat. Pi. 1 1 \ r 

the Elder. — " There is no lie so bare-faced as to be at a loss 

for a voucher." 
Nunc aut nunquam. — " Now or never." Motto of the Earl 

of Kilmorey. 
Nunquam non pardtus. — "Never unprepared." Motto of 

the Marquis of Annandale. 
Nuper idoneut. Hon. — "Lately fit for." Or, some time 

ago I was equal to this. 

0. 

O amdri dies! O Jleblles nodes! — "Oh! agonizing dayil 
Oh! nights of tears!" 

O dea certe. Vieo. — " surely a divinity." 

" goddess, for no less you seem." 

O mors, ero mors tua. — " O death, I will be thy death." 
Motto of a Society called the Black Society. 

Occupdri in multis et magnis negbtiis. — " To be engaged in 
various and important affairs." 

Ocfilum non curdbit sine toto caplte, 
Nee caput sine toto corpore, 
Nee totum corpus sine ariimd. 

— " The physician cannot cure the eye while the head is 
diseased, nor the head while the bodily system is de- 
ranged, nor the body while the mind is ill at ease." 

Omnia bona bonis. — " All things are good to good men." 
Motto of Lord "VVenman. 

Omnia vendlia nummo. — " All things are to be bought with 
money." Everything has its price. 

Omnis sors ferendo superanda est. — " Every lot is to be over- 
come by endurance." 

Ora et labbra. — " Pray and work." Motto of the Earl of 
Dalhousie. See Laborare, &c. 

Ore rotundo. — " With round mouth," i. e. with a full-sound- 
ing, or eloquent mouth. 





P. 



Parvi sunt f oris arma, nisi est consilium domi. Cic. — " Arms 
are worth little abroad, if there is not wisdom at home." 

Patientia Icesa fit furor . — " Patience abased becomes fury." 

Patltur qui vincit. — " He suffers who conquers." Motto of 
Lord Kinnaird. No victory is to be obtained without 
some inconvenience. 

Patriot, cara, carior libertas. — " Dear is my country, but 
dearer is liberty." Motto of the Earl of Radnor. 

Pauci dignoscere possunt 

Vera bona, atque illis multum diversa. Juv. 
— " Few men can dbcriminate between things which are 
really good, and those which are of a very different na- 
ture." 

Paulo post futiirum. — "A little after the future." The name 
of one of the Greek teuses facetiously translated, used 
ironically to signify something remotely distant, or post- 
poned to an indefinite period. 

Paupertas durum onus miseris mortdUbus. — " Poverty is a 
cruel burden to miserable man." 

Paupertdtis pudor et fuga. — " The shame and dread of po- 
verty." 

Per angusta ad augusta. — " Through difficulties to grandeur." 
Motto of the Earl of Massarene. 

Per ardua liberi. — " Through difficulties we obtain free- 
dom." Motto of Lord Camelford. 

Per mare, per terras. — " By sea and land." Motto of Baron 
Macdonald. 

Periculum fortitudine evdsi. — " I have escaped danger by 
fortitude." Motto of Lord Hartland. 

Perlmus Ileitis. — " We perish by things permitted." A 
favourite saying of Sir Matthew Hale. Those vices are the 
most insidious of which the law takes no positive cog- 
nizance. 

Plausu petis clarescere vulgi. — " You seek celebrity through 
the plaudits of the mob." 

Plus e medico quam e morbo periculi. — " There is more to be 
feared from the physician than from the disease." 

Porro unum est necessdrium. — " Moreover one thing is need- 
 

t'ul." Motto of the Duke of Wellington and Marquis 
Wellesley. 

Post prcelia preemia. — " After battle rewards." Motto of 
the Lord Rossmore. 

Post tot naufragia tutus. — "Safe after so many shipwrecks." 

Postrhnus in pugnd, primus infugd. — "The last to fight, the 
first to fly." 

Prima virtus est vitio carere. QuiNTlL. — "The beginning 
of excellence is to be free from error." 

Pro qualittlte temporis. — "According to the nature of the 
emergency." 

Pro rege et patrid.—" For my king and country." Motto of 
the Earl of Leven. 

Pro rege etpopiilo. — " For the king and the people." Motto 
of Lord De Dunstanville. 

Pro rege, lege, grege. — " For the king, the law, and the peo- 
ple." Motto of Lord Brougham. 

Procerus dejlcit arbfrres procella vehement. — " A violent storm 
uproots lofty trees." 

Prodesse qiuun consplci. — " To do good rather than be con- 
spicuous." Motto of Lord Somers. 

Puellis idoneus. Hoe. — "A ladies' man." 



Q. 

Qua amissa salva. — " What was lost is safe." Motto of the 

Earl of Kintore. 
Qualis rex, talis grex. — "As the king is, so are his subjects." 
Qui labbrat orat. St. Augustin. — " He who labours prays." 

See Laborare, &c. 
Qui me amat, amat et canem meum. Prov. — " Who loves me, 

loves my dog." Quoted by Saint Bernard. 
Qui stat, videat ne cadat. — " Let him who stands take heed 

lest he fall." See 1 Cor. x. 12. 
Qui uti scit, ei bona. — "He should possess wealth who 

knows how to use it." 
Quicquid sibi imperdvit animus, obtinuit. Sen. — " Whatever 

the mind enjoins on itself as an object, it attains." 
Quid est dignltas indiqno, nisi circulus aureus in ndribus suis ? 

Silvianus. — " What is honour to the unworthy, but a 

golden ring in a swine's snout?" 



Quid obseratis auribus fundis preces ? Hob. — " Why persist 
in your importunity to ears that are closed ?" 

Quis erit innocens, si clam vel palam accusdre sufficiat ? — 
" Who would be innocent, if mere accusation, secret or 
open, could convict ? " 

Quis non inveniet turbd quod amdret in ilia ? Ovid. — " Who 
can fail to find in such a medley something to please 
him ? " 

Quis separdbit nos ? — " Who shall separate us ?" 

Quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis convalescPre non po- 
test. Law Max. — " That which is invalid from the first, 
cannot be made valid by lapse of time." 

Quod est inconveniens et contra ratibnem non est permissum 
in lege. Law Max. — " Whatever is inconsistent with it- 
self and contrary to reason is not permitted by law." 

Quod fieri non debuit, factum valet. Coke. — " That which 
ought not to have been done, when done holds good." A 
marriage, for instance, at an illegal age. 

Quod stulte susctpitur, impie gPrltur, misere finltur. — " What 
is foolishly conceived, is wickedly executed, and has a 
wretched termination." 



R. 

Becte et suavtter. — " Uprightly and mildly." Motto of Lord Scarsdale.

Relicta sunt cuncta neglecta apud ilium. — " Everything in his house is left neglected." EA'erything lies in disorder.

Res notce, atque ad omnes pervulgdtas. — " Things well known, and spoken of universally." 

Ripa irremedbilis undae. ViEG. — " The bank of the stream never to be repassed." 



Saldrium non dat multis salem. — " To many salary does not 
give salt." In many official situations the salary is not 
equal to the expense. 

Sa/>ientia vino obumbrdtur. Plint the Klder. — " Wisdon? 



is obscured by wine." " When the wine's in, the wit 'a 
out." 

Scenis decora alta futuris. Viro. — " Lofty ornaments 

for future scenic magnificence." 

Se causam clamat, crimenqne, caputque maldrum. Virg. — 
" She exclaims that she is the cause, that hers is the 
crime, and that she ia the author of their woes." 

Seen ml is dubiisque rectus. — "Unshaken in prosperous or in 
adverse fortune." Motto of Viscount Duncan. 

Sed nunc nan erat his locus. Hob. — " But at present there 
is no place for these." These matters are not wanted. 

Sedet ceternumque sedebit. Vina. — " He sits and will sit for 
ever." 

Semper fifclis. — "Always faithful." Motto of Lord Onslow. 

Semper habens PyUtden attquem qui curet Oresten. — M Always 
having a Py lades (a friend) to take care of Orestes." 

Sequor, nee inferior. — " I follow, but not inferior." Motto 
of Lord Crewe. 

Serpentes avibus geminentur, tigribus agni. Hor. — " As 
though serpents should couple with birds, lambs with 
tigers." You may as well expect the most opposite 
things in nature to be reconciled, as that such a thing 
can happen. 

Servdta fides ctnPri. — " Faithful to the memory of my ances- 
tors." Motto of Lord Harrowby. 

Si hie esses, altter sentlres. — " If you stood in my circum- 
stances, you would think otherwise." 

Si jus violandum, regnandi gratia violandum est. — "If justice 
may ever be violated, it may be violated for the sake of 
empire." 

Si natiira negat, facit indigndtio versum. Juv. — " If nature 
refuses indignation will prompt a verse." 

Si volet usus, 

Quern penes arbitrium est et jus et norma loquendi. Hor. 
— " If it is the will of custom, with which rests the di- 
rection, and law, and rule of speech." See Mortalia 
facta, &c. 

Sibi parat malum qui altPri parat. — " He meditates evil for 
himself who meditates it for another." 

Sic in orig. — For Sic in originali. " So in the original." 

Sic ruit ad ceUbres cultissima foeniina ludos. Ovid. — " Thus 



SIC— SUF. 527 

do the women in their best attire eagerly fleck to the 
games." 

Siccis omnia nam dura Deus proposuit ; neque 

Morddces altter diffugiunt solicitudines. Hoe. 

— " The god (Bacchus) makes everything grievous to those 
who love not wine ; nor can corroding cares be dispelled 
by other means." 

Sicut in stagno genPrantur vermes, sic in otibso males cogitd- 
tidnes. — " As worms are generated in a stagnant pool, so 
are evil thoughts in the mind of him who is unemployed." 

Similitude- morum parit amicitiam. — " A congeniality of man- 
ners and disposition begets friendship." 

Sola Deo salus. — " Safety is in God alone." Motto of Lord 
Eokeby. 

Sola nobiVitas virtus. — " Virtue is the only nobility." Motto 
of the Marquis of Abercdrn, adapted from Juvenal. 

Solet agi sincerltas ad perniciem. Ph^ed. — " Sincerity is used 
to our destruction." Sincerity and candour may expose 
us to the arts of the overreaching. 

Spectemur agendo. — " Let us make our character known by 
our actions." Motto of Viscount Clifden. 

Spero melibra. — " I hope for better things." Motto of Vis- 
count Stcrmont. 

Spes alit exules. — " Hope sxipports the exile." 

Spes servat afflictos. — " Hope sustains the unfortunate." 

SpirUus promptus, caro autem infirma. — " The spirit is willing, 
but the flesh is weak." See Matt. xxvi. 41. Virtuous 
resolutions are often formed without the requisite firm- 
ness to carry them into execution. 

Squamis astanilbus Hydri. Cic. — " The scales of the Hydra 
bristling up." 

Stare loco nescit, micat auribus, et tremit artus, 

Collect umque premens volvit sub ndrtbus ignem. Virg. 
— " He cannot stand still, he pricks up his ears, he trem- 
bles in every limb, and rolls the collected fire compressed 
within his nostrils." Description of a spirited horse. 

Studiis et rebus honestis. — " By honourable pursuits and ac- 
tions." Motto of Lord Ashburton. 

SujTtcit ad id, natvra quod poscit. Sen. — " It suffices for 
what nature requires." 
 

Super abyttum ambulant. — " Treading on an abyss." Ap- 
plied to a man who is on unsafe ground, and in danger of 
sinking into the gulf of ruin. 

Sutpendent omnia nato. Hob. — " Turning everything to 
ridicule." 

Suum quemque tcelut agitat. Cic. — " Every man has his be. 
setting sin." 



Tale quale.— 11 Such as it is." 

Tandem Jit turciilut arbor. — " A twig in time becomes a tree." 

Motto of the Marquis of Waterford. 
Tarde ted tute. — " Slowly but surely." 
Tectior et occultior cupiditat. Cic. — " Avariciousness close 

and concealed." 
Terminut a quo. — "The limits" or "bounds from which." 

In metaphysics, the place at which any motion commences 

is so called, and stands in contradistinction to the other 

extreme, called the Terminut ad quern. A bastard is, in 

law, a Terminut a quo, i. e. the tirst of his family, the 

source from which it originates. 
Torpent mihi membra. Hoe. — "My limbs are enfeebled," 

become languid. 
Trudit gemmat, et frondet explicat omnet. Virg. — " It 

puts forth buds and unfolds all its leaves." Description 

of the vine bursting into leaf. 
Ta ne cede malit, ted contra audentior ito. Vibg. — " Yield 

not to misfortune, but, on the contrary, meet it with 

greater spirit." The first four words form the motto of 

Lord Milton. 
Turbine raptut ingmii. — "Impelled by the impetuosity of 

his genius." 
Turpe ett in patrid peregrindri, et in iit rebut quee ad patriam 

pertinent hotpttem ette. Manut. — "It is disgraceful to 

be as a stranger in o le's own country, and to be unacquainted with matten re'ating to it."  